david is the third king of the united kingdom of israel and judah .
david is a young shepherd who gains fame first as a musician and later by killing the enemy champion goliath .
he becomes a favorite of saul and a close friend of saul 's son jonathan .
worried that david is trying to take his throne , saul turns on david .
after saul and jonathan are killed , david is made king of israel .
david conquers jerusalem , taking the ark of the covenant into the city , and established the kingdom of jerusalem .
as king , david commits adultery with bathsheba , leading him to the death of her husband uriah the hittite .
because of this sin , god denies david the opportunity to build the temple , and his son absalom tries to overthrow him .
after absalom 's death he returns to the city to rule israel .
before he dies , he chooses his son solomon as successor .
he is honored in the prophetic literature as an ideal king and the forefather of a future messiah , and many psalms are ascribed to him .
historians of the ancient near east agree that david probably existed around 1000 bc , but that there is little that can be said about him as a historical figure .
it was initially thought that there were no evidence outside of the bible concerning david , but the tel dan stele , an inscribed stone erected by a king of damascus in the late 9th / early 8th centuries bce to commemorate his victory over two enemy kings , contains the phrase in , " bytwd " , which most scholars translate as " house of david " .
the united kingdom was not a part of the bible .
david is richly represented in post-biblical jewish written and oral tradition , and is discussed in the new testament .
early christians interpreted the life of jesus in light of the references to the messiah and to david .
david is mentioned in the quran .
david has inspired many interpretations in art and literature over centuries .
the first book of samuel tells david of bethlehem .
his mother is not named in any book of the bible , but the talmud says she was the daughter of adael .
he was given two sisters , zeruiah and abigail .
the book of ruthgraphs possibly also 4th century bcerar traces his ancestry back to ruth .
david is described as cementing his relations with various political and national groups through marriage .
king saul offered david his oldest daughter , merab .
david did not refuse the offer , but humbled himself in front of saul to be considered among the king 's family .
saul reneged and gave merab in marriage to adriel the meholathite .
after that , saul gave her in marriage to david .
saul became jealous of david .
then saul sent michal to galim to marry palti , son of laish .
david took wives in hebron , according to the hebrew bible , they were ahinoam the yizre ' elite , abigail , the wife of nabal the carmelite , maacah , the daughter of talmay , king of geshur ; haggith ; abital ; and eglah .
later , david wanted michal back and abner , ish-bosheth 's army commander , delivered her to david , causing her husband nedra paltitized great grief .
the book of chronicles lists his sons with his wives and concubines .
in hebron , david had six sons : amnon , by ahinoam , daniel , by abigail , by maachah , adonijah , by haggith , shephatiah , by abital , and ithream , by eglah .
bathsheba had two sons : nathan , and solomon .
david 's sons were ibhar , elishua , eliphelet , nogah , nephelet , japhia , elishada and eliada .
jerimoth , who is not mentioned in any of the genealogies , is mentioned as another of his sons in .
tamar 's daughter , tamar , is raped by her half-brother amnon .
god is angered when saul , israel 's king , unlawfully offers a sacrifice and later disobeys a command both to kill all of the amalekites and to destroy their confiscated property .
because of this , god sends the prophet samuel to anoint a shepherd , david , the youngest son of jesse of bethlehem , to be king instead .
after god sends an evil spirit to torment saul , his servants recommend that he send for a man skilled in playing the lyre .
a servant says that david is " skillful in playing , a man of valor , a warrior , prudent in speech , and a man of good presence ; and the lord is with him . "
david enters saul 's service as one of the royal armour bearers .
israel and the philistines , and the giant goliath challenges the israelites to send out a champion to face him in single combat .
david , sent by his father to bring food to his brothers in saul 's army , declares that he can defeat goliath .
refusing the king 's offer of the royal armour , he kills goliath with his sling .
saul inquires is the name of the young hero 's father .
saul sets david over his army .
all israel loves david , but his popularity makes saul sad that he thinks about " what else can he wish but the kingdom ? "
saul plots his death , but saul 's son jonathan warns him of his father 's schemes and david flee .
he goes first to nob , where he is fed by the priest ahimelech .
david sees that he is in danger .
he goes next to the cave of adullam , where his family join him .
from there he goes to hide with the king of moab , but the prophet gad advises him to leave and he goes to the forest of hereth , and then to keilah , where he is involved in a further battle with the philistines .
saul plans to besiege keilah so that he can capture david .
from there he lives in the mountainous wilderness of ziph .
jonathan meets with david again .
after the people of ziph notify saul that david is taking refuge in their territory , saul seeks confirmation and plans to capture david in the wilderness of maon , but his attention is taken by a renewed philistine invasion and david is able to secure some respite at ein gedi .
he returns from battle with the philistines , while he is in pursuit of david .
david realises he has an opportunity to kill saul , but this is not his intention : he secretly cut off a corner of saul 's robe , and when saul has left the cave he comes out to pay homage to saul as the king and to demonstrate , using the piece of robe , that he holds no malice towards saul .
saul recognises david as his successor .
david is able to get into saul 's camp on the hill of hachilah .
david declines , saying he will not " stretch out his hand against the lord 's anointed . "
saul tells him that he has been wrong to pursue david and blesses him .
in , saul ceases to pursue david , because david took refuge a second time with achish , the philistine king of gath .
achish permits david to live in ziklag , close to the border between gath and judea .
achish believes that david had become a loyal vassal , but he never wins the trust of the princes or lords of gath .
david returns to ziklag .
jonathan and saul are killed in battle .
in the north , saul 's son ish-bosheth is king of israel , and war ends .
with the death of saul 's son , the elders of israel came to hebron and david is anointed king over all of israel .
he conquered jerusalem , and made it his capital .
he brings the ark of the covenant to the city , intending to build a temple for god , but the prophet nathan forbids it , prophesying that the temple would be built by one of david 's sons .
nathan also says that god has made a promise with the house of david .
david wins additional victories over the philistines , moabites , edomites , amalekites , ammonites and king hadadezer of aram-zobah .
david remains in jerusalem .
he finds a woman , bathsheba , bathing and summons her .
the text in the bible says that bathsheba had sex in the year before .
she hopes that he will go home to his wife and the child will be his .
uriah does not visit his wife , however , so david conspires to have him killed in the heat of battle .
david marries bathsheba .
in response , nathan tells the punishment that will fall upon him , saying " the sword shall never depart from your house . "
when david acknowledges that he has sinned , nathan advises him that his sin is forgiven and he will not die , but the child will .
nathan 's son , absalom , is based on his desire to power rebels .
absalom 's forces are routed at the battle of the wood of ephraim , and he is caught by his long hair in the branches of a tree where , contrary to david 's order , he is killed by joab , the commander of david 's army .
his favourite son is " o my son absalom , my son absalom !
would i had died instead of you , o absalom , my son ! "
joab persuades him to recover from " the extravagance of his grief " and to fulfil his duty to his people .
david returns to gilgal and is escorted across the river jordan and back to jerusalem by the tribes of judah and benjamin .
when david is old and bedridden adonijah , his eldest surviving son and natural heir , he declares himself king .
bathsheba and nathan go to david and get his agreement to crown bathsheba 's son solomon as king , according to david 's earlier promise , and the revolt of adonijah is put down .
david dies at the age of 70 after lasting for 40 years .
the book of samuel calls david a skillful harp player and " the sweet psalmist of israel . "
while almost half of the psalms are headed " a psalm of david " , there are also david 's " to david " or " for david " .
psalm 34 is said to be a legend from david , who was a king of the netherlands .
abimelech allows david to depart , exclaiming , " am i so short of madmen that you have to bring this fellow here to carry on like this in front of me ?
must this man come into my house ?
the tel dan stele is a stone made by a king of damascus in the late 9th / early 8th centuries bce to commemorate his victory over two enemy kings .
other scholars , such as anson rainey have challenged this reading , but it is likely that this is a reference to a dynasty of the kingdom of judah .
the mesha stele from moab , dating from approximately the same period , may also contain the name david in two places , although this is less certain than the mention in the tel dan inscription .
the bible scholar kenneth kitchen suggests that david 's name also appears in a relief of pharaoh shoshenq mathew usually identified with shishak in the bible , 1 kings 14 : 25-27 dynasties .
the relief claims that shoshenq raided places in palestine in 925 bc .
the relief is damaged and interpretation is uncertain .
all that is known of david comes from the biblical literature .
the books of samuel were substantially composed during the time of king josiah at the end of the 7th century bc , extended during the babylonian exile babylon babylon 6th century bce .
the authors and editors of samuel drew on many earlier sources , including the " history of david 's rise " issue 1 samuel 16 : 14-2 samuel 5 : 10 wickets , and the " succession narrative " .
the book of chronicles , which tells the story from a different point of view , was probably written in the period 350-300 bc .
the authors and editors of samuel and chronicles did not aim to record history , but to promote david 's reign as inevitable and desirable , and for this reason there is little about david that is concrete and undisputed .
the archaeological evidence suggests that in the 10th century bce , the time of david , judah was sparsely inhabited and jerusalem was no more than a small village .
the biblical evidence says that david 's judah was something less than a full-fledged monarchy : it often calls him " negid " , for example , " prince " or " chief " , rather than " melek " , meaning " king " .
beyond this , the full range of possible interpretations is available .
john bright , in his " history of israel " egypt , takes samuel at face value .
donald b . redford , however , sees all reconstructions from biblical sources for the united monarchy period as examples of " academic wishful thinking " .
thomas l . thompson rejects the historicity of the biblical narrative : " the history of palestine and of its peoples is very different from the bible 's narratives , whatever political claims to the contrary may be .
judea was an independent history of the iron i and iron ii periods .
however , amihai mazar concluded that based on recent archeological findings , like those in city of david , khirbet qeiyafa , tel rehov , khirbat en-nahas and others " the deconstruction of united monarchy and the devaluation of judah as a state in 9th century is unacceptable interpretation of historic data . "
mazar , based on archeological evidences , the united monarchy can be described as a " state in development " .
some studies of david have been written : baruch halpern has pictured david as a lifelong vassal of achish , the philistine king of gath ; israel finkelstein and neil asher silberman have identified as the oldest and most reliable section of samuel .
steven mckenzie , associate professor of the hebrew bible at rhodes college and author of " king david : a biography " , argues that david came from a wealthy family , was " ambitious and ruthless " and a tyrant who murdered his opponents , including his own sons .
critical bible scholarship holds that the biblical account of david ’ s rise to power is a political apology .
israel finkelstein and neil asher silberman reject the idea that david ruled over a united monarchy .
they say that israel and judah were still polytheistic in the time of david and solomon .
they note that david 's military campaigns and a relative underdevelopment of jerusalem , the capital of judah , compared to a more developed and urbanized samaria , capital of israel .
jacob l . wright , associate professor of hebrew bible at emory university , has written that the most popular legends about david , including his killing of goliath , his affair with bathsheba , and his ruling of a united kingdom of israel rather than just just israel , are the creation of those who lived after him , in particular those who lived after him , in particular the hellenistic or hellenistic periods .
david is an important figure in rabbinic judaism , with many legends around him .
according to one tradition , david was raised as the son of his father jesse and spent his early years herding his father 's sheep in the wilderness while his brothers were in school .
the talmud states that it was not adultery at all .
according to talmudic sources , the death of uriah was not to be considered murder .
however , in tractate sanhedrin , david expressed remorse over hisssions and sought forgiveness .
god ultimately forgave david and bathsheba but would not remove their sins from scripture .
in jewish legend , david 's sin with bathsheba is the punishment for david ’ s excessive self-consciousness who had besought god to lead him into temptation so that he might give proof of his constancy as abraham , isaac , and jacob mccartney .
according to midrashim , adam gave up 70 years of his life for the life of king david .
also , according to the talmud yerushalmi , david was born and died on the jewish holiday of shavuotwyla .
his piety was said to be so great that his prayers could bring down things from heaven .
the idea of the messiah is important in christianity .
the title " son of david " was first given to the king of israel .
this was the background to the concept of messiahship in early christianity .
the church believed that " the life of david foreshadowed the life of christ ; bethlehem is the birthplace of both ; the shepherd life of david points out christ , the good shepherd ; the five stones chosen to slay goliath are typical of the five wounds ; the betrayal by his trusted counsellor , achitdron , achitdron , and the passage of christ 's sacred passion .
many of the davidic psalms , as we learn from the new testament , are clearly typical of the future messiah . "
in the middle ages , charlemagne thought of himself .
this was not a new idea , but one whose content and significance were greatly enlarged by him " .
the linking of david to earthly kingship was shown in european cathedral windows of the late middle ages , through the device of the tree of jesse , its branches demonstrates how divine kingship descended from jesse , through his son david to jesus .
western rite churcheseux lutheran , roman catholic archdiocese , and catholic archdiocese celebrate his feast day on 29 december , eastern-rite on 19 december .
the eastern orthodox church and eastern catholic churches celebrate the feast day of the holy righteous prophet and king david .
he is also celebrated on the sunday after the nativity , together with joseph and james , the brother of the lord .
in european christian culture of the middle ages , david was made a member of the nine worthies , a group of heroes encapsulating all the ideal qualities of chivalry .
his life was thus proposed as a valuable subject for study by those aspiring to chivalric status .
this aspect of david in the nine worthies was popularised firstly through literature , and was thereafter adopted as a frequent subject for painters and sculptors .
david was considered as a model ruler and a symbol of divinely ordained monarchy throughout medieval western europe and eastern christendom .
david was thought to be the biblical predecessor to christian roman and byzantine emperors and the name " new david " was used as an honorific reference to these rulers .
the georgian bagratids and the solomonic dynasty of ethiopia claimed a direct biological descent from him .
charlemagne used the name of david as his pseudonym .
david is an important figure in islam .
david is mentioned several times in the quran .
david killed goliathmonium , a giant soldier in the philistine army .
when david killed goliath , god granted goliath kingship and enforced ithor 38 : 20 paces .
david was made god 's " vicegerent on earth " ; later , he gave david sound judgmentgement 21 : 78 ; 37 : 21 – 24,26ciful as well as the psalms , regarded as books of divine wisdom [mask] 4 : 163 ; 17 : 55arth ; 17 : 55 est .
the birds and mountains united with david in uttering praise to godtify 21 : 79 ; 34 : 10 ; 38 : 18chrome , god also instructed david in the art of fashioning chain-mail out of wrought ironside .
together with solomon , david gave judgment in a case of damage to the fields .
muslims reject this narrative .
the hadith also stress david 's zeal in daily prayer and fasting .
they mention david 's gift in singing his psalms as well as his musical and vocal talents .
his voice is described as having had a captivating power , weaving its influence not only over man but over all beasts and nature , who would unite with him to praise god .
for a considerable period , starting in the 15th century and continuing until the 19th , french playing card manufacturers assigned to each of the court cards names taken from history or mythology .
in this context , the king of spades was often known as " david " .
