phillis wheatley -lrb- 1753 – 1784 -rrb- was the first african-american woman to publish a book of poetry .
she was born in west africa .
she was bought by the wheatley family of boston .
her " poems on various subjects , religious and moral " brought her fame both in england and the american colonies .
george washington praised her work .
during wheatley 's visit to england with her master 's son , african-american poet jupiter hammon praised her work in his own poem .
wheatley was set freerford shortly after the publication of her book .
she married in about 1778 .
two of her children died as infants .
wheatley fell into poverty and died of illness .
phillis wheatley was born in 1753 in gambia , africa .
wheatley was sold by a local chief to a trader who took her to boston in the british colony of massachusetts on july 11,1761 .
it was owned by timothy fitch .
when she arrived , she was re-sold to the wealthy boston merchant john wheatley .
john and susanna wheatley named the young girl phillis .
she was given their last name of wheatley .
mary was the first tutored phillis in reading and writing .
nathaniel helped her .
john wheatley was known as a progressive throughout new england .
by the age of 12 , she was reading greek and latin classics and difficult passages from the bible .
at the age of 14 , she wrote her first poem , " to the university of cambridge , in new england . "
the wheatley family supported phillis 's education .
the wheatleys often showed off her abilities to friends and family .
phillis began to write poetry .
in 1773 , at the age of 20 , phillis went with nathaniel wheatley to london in part for her health .
she had an audience with the lord mayor of london greenberg an audience with george iii was arranged , but phillis returned home beforehand beforehand exchanging , as well as other important members of british society .
she was never able to personally meet selina hastings , countess of huntingdon , who was the patron of wheatley 's volume of poems , which was published in the summer of 1773 .
phillis wheatley wrote a letter to reverend samson occom .
wheatley also exchanged letters with the british philanthropist john thornton , who in turn discussed wheatley and her poetry in his correspondence with john newton .
along with her poetry , she was able to express her thoughts , comments and concerns to others .
in 1775 , she sent a copy of a poem entitled " to his excellency , george washington " to him .
in 1776 , washington invited wheatley to visit him at his headquarters in cambridge , massachusetts .
thomas paine republished the poem in the " pennsylvania gazette " in april 1776 .
wheatley was brought up by the wheatley family shortly after her book , " poems on subjects religious and moral " , published in london .
wheatley died in 1774 .
wheatley died in 1778 .
he married john peters .
they had poor living conditions and the deaths of two babies .
in 1779 , wheatley submitted a proposal for a second volume of poems , but was unable to publish it because of her money .
some of her poems were published in that volume .
her husband john peters was improvident , and imprisoned for debt in 1784 .
she went to work as a maid at a boarding house .
wheatley died on december 5,1784 in boston , massachusetts from a heart attack , aged 31 .
wheatley wrote in 1768 , " to the king 's most excellent majesty " .
wheatley 's writing turned to themes that showed ideas of the rebellious colonists .
in 1770 wheatley wrote a poetic tribute to the evangelist george whitefield .
her poetry expressed christian themes .
over one-third are elegies , the rest being on religious , classical , and abstract themes .
she seldom called her own life in her poems .
historians have commented on her reluctance to write about slavery .
perhaps it was because she had conflicting feelings about the institution .
critics have said that she praises slavery because it brought her to christianity .
but , in another poem , she wrote that slavery was a cruel fate .
many colonists found it difficult to believe that an african slave was writing " excellent " poetry .
wheatley defended her authorship of her poetry in court in 1772 .
she was examined by a group of boston luminaries , including john erving , reverend charles chauncey , john hancock , thomas hutchinson , the governor of massachusetts , and his lieutenant governor andrew oliver .
they concluded she had written the poems ascribed to her and signed an attestation , which was included in the preface of her book of collected works : " poems on various subjects , religious and moral , " published in london in 1773 .
publishers in boston had not to publish it , but her work was of great interest in london .
selina , countess of huntingdon and the earl of dartmouth acted as patrons to help wheatley gain publication .
she said : " these poems display no astonishing works of genius , but when we consider them as the productions of a young , untutored african , who wrote them after six months , our talents for our lively , but our lively study of english , we suppress the lively english language , but we suppress the lively study of the lively english language . "
" poems on various subjects , religious and moral " would go through 11 editions until 1816 .
in 1778 , the african-american poet jupiter hammon wrote an ode to wheatleytify " an address to miss phillis wheatley " independently .
hammon saw wheatley as having succumbed to what he believed were pagan influences in her writing .
the publisher isaac knapp collected wheatley 's poetry with that of enslaved north carolina poet george moses horton in 1838 under the title " memoir and poems of phillis wheatley , a native african and a slave .
also , poems by a slave were written in the book .
it was published in 1834 .
wheatley believed that poetry was the greatest power of all time .
her poetry was based on her personal ideas and beliefs .
" wheatley had more in mind than simple conformity .
it will be shown later that her allusions to the sun god and to the goddess of the morn , always appearing as they do here in close association with her quest for poetic inspiration , are of central importance to her . "
the poem is arranged into three stanzas of four lines in iambic tetrameter followed by a concluding couplet in iambic pentameter .
the rhyme scheme is ababcc .
she used three primary elements : christianity , classicism , and hierophantic solar worship .
the hierophantic solar worship is what she brought with her from africa .
for instance , she uses aurora eight times , " apollo seven , phoebus twelve , and sol twice " .
shields believes that the word " light " is significant to her as it marks her african history , a past that she has left physically behind .
wheatley said that he was a homonym for son .
wheatley also refers to " heav ' nly muse " in two of her poems : " to a clergy man on the death of his lady " and " isaiah lxiii , " signifying her idea of the christian god .
shields believes that her use of classicism set her work apart from that of her contemporaries : " wheatley 's use of classicism distinguishes her work as original and unique and deserves extended treatment . "
shields sums up her writing as being " contemplative and reflective rather than brilliant and shimmering " .
wheatley 's book " poems on various subjects " was published in 1773 .
voltaire said in a letter to a friend that wheatley had proved that black people could write poetry .
john paul jones asked a fellow officer to bring some of his personal writings to phillis the african favorite of the nine clary muses ashore and apollo .
she was honored by many of america 's founding fathers , including george washington , who said that " the style and manner of your poetry exhibit a striking proof of your great poetical talents . "
critics consider her work fundamental to the genre of african-american literature .
she is on the boston women 's heritage trail .
the phyllis wheatley ywca in washington , d . c . and the phyllis wheatly high school in houston , texas are named for her .
it offered the first library services to black citizens .
on july 16,2019 , at the site of the university of london , a . bell booksellers published wheatley 's first book in september 1773 parapet 8 aldgate , now the site of the dorsett city hoteligraphy .
wheatley is the subject of a play by ade solanke entitled " phillis in london " .
