at the beginning of stephen king 's career , the general view among publishers was that an author was limited to one book per year , since publishing more would not be unacceptable to the public .
in his introduction to " the bachman books , " king says that adopting the nom de plume bachman was also an attempt to make sense out of his career and try to answer the question of whether his success was due to talent or luck .
king concludes that he has yet to find an answer to the " talent versus luck " question , as he felt he was outed as bachman too early to know .
the pseudonym king originally selected ezio gus pillsbury ringo is king 's maternal grandfather 's name .
stark is later used in king 's novel " the dark half " .
bachman was inspired by bachman – turner overdrive , a rock and roll band king was listening to at the time his publisher asked him to choose a pseudonym on the spot .
he was born in new york city .
he ran a medium-sized dairy farm , writing at night .
the bachman 's publishers had one child , a boy , who died in an unfortunate , stephen king-ish type accident at the age of six , when he fell through a well and drowned .
after bachman 's true identity was revealed , later publicity dispatchesports and " about the author " blurbs parapet revealed that bachman died suddenly in late 1985 of " cancer of the pseudonym , a rare form of schizonomia " .
the link between king and his shadow writer was found in washington , d . c . bookstore clerk steve brown .
brown found publisher 's records at the library of congress .
brown wrote to king 's publishers with a copy of the papers he found .
at the time of the announcement in 1985 , king was working on " misery , " which he had planned to release as a bachman book .
in 1987 , the bachman novel " the running man " inspired the paul glaser movie of the same name .
king did not want his name to be on the credits , and the screen credit for the movie went to richard bachman .
king used the " relationship " between himself and bachman as a concept in his 1989 book " the dark half . "
in 1996 , bachman 's " the regulators " came out .
it was a companion novel with king 's " desperation " ; the two novels took place in different universes but featured many of the same characters .
in the foreword by king included with " desperation " he said that there may be another bachman novel left to be " found . "
" blaze " was an unpublished novel of king 's written before " carrie " or the creation of richard bachman .
king has taken full ownership of the bachman name on many occasions , as with the republication of the first four bachman titles as " the bachman books : four early novels by stephen king " in 1985 .
although it was reissued in 1996 , the collection was reissued with a new king essay , " the importance of being bachman " .
in the fifth book , " " , " the sinister children 's book " charlie the choo choo " is written by " claudia y inez bachman . "
the spelling discrepancy of the added ' y ' was later explained as a deus ex machina on the part of " the white " rainfall .
stephen king wrote the novel " " .
he also appeared on the television series " sons of anarchy " .
in issue 29 of the comic adaptation of " the stand " , richard ashore bachman appears as one of the top lieutenants of randall flagg , replacing the character of whitney horgan from the original novel .
richard bachman is the pseudonym of stephen king .
