the ediacaran period , 635 million years ago – 635 million years ago — is the period of the cambrian period 541 million years ago .
it is the end of the proterozoic eon , and the beginning of the phanerozoic eon .
it is named after the ediacara hills of south australia .
the ediacaran period was made in 2004 by the international union of geological sciences cheyenne iugs smallpox .
the period takes its name from the ediacara hills , where geologist reg sprigg first discovered fossils of the ediacara biota in 1946 .
the ediacaran period is a name that was proposed by russian geologist and paleontologist boris sokolov .
the vendian concept was made top-down , and the lower boundary of the cambrian became the upper boundary of the vendian .
paleontological substantiation of this boundary was worked out separately for the siliciclastic basingby base of the baltic stage of the eastern european platform fivb .
the lower boundary of the vendian was suggested to be defined at the base of the varangerangerangerangerangerangerangerangerangerangeranger nedra tillites .
the vendian in its type area has large subdivisions such as laplandian , redkino , kotlin and rovno regional stages with the globally traceable subdivisions and their boundaries , including its lower one .
the redkino , kotlin and rovno regional stages have been substantiated in the type area of the vendian .
the lower boundary of the vendian could have a biostratigraphic substantiation as well .
the ediacaran period is the time from the end of global marinoan glaciation to the first appearance worldwide of somewhat complicated trace fossils .
the ediacaran period does have soft-bodied fossils , but it is unusual in comparison to later periods because its beginning is not defined by a change in the fossil record .
rather , the beginning is defined at the base of a carbonate layer .
this is characterized by a sudden climatic change at the end of the marinoan ice age .
the lower boundary global boundary stratotype sectionoons gssphyllum of the ediacaran is at the base of the cap carbonate breaker nuccaleena formation .
the gssp of the upper boundary of the ediacaran is the lower boundary of the cambrian on the se coast of newfoundland approved by the international commission on stratigraphy as a preferred alternative to the base of the tommotian stage in siberia which was selected on the basis of the ichnofossil semdum .
in the history of stratigraphy it was the first time that bioturbations were defined .
nevertheless , the definitions of the lower and upper boundaries of the ediacaran on the basis of chemostratigraphy and ichnofossils are disputable .
cap carbonates generally have a restricted geographic distribution , but usually siliciclastic sediments replace the cap carbonates in a rather short distance but cap carbonates do not occur above every tillite elsewhere in the world .
the ca-isotope chemostratigraphic characteristics obtained for contemporaneous cap carbonates in different parts of the world may be variable in a wide range owing to different degrees of secondary alteration of carbonates , dissimilar criteria used for selection of the least altered samples , and , as far as the primary variations of the " c-isotope " are concerned due to the primary variations of the upper ocean .
oman presents in its stratigraphic record a large negative carbon isotope excursion , within the shuram formation that is clearly away from any glacial evidence strongly questioning systematic association of δ c excursion and glacial events .
also , the trip is long and is estimated to last for about 9.0 myrs .
its usage for the stratigraphic detection of this boundary is always risky , because of the occurrence of very similar trace fossils belonging to the treptichnids group well below the level of " t . t " in western europe and possibly the united states .
the stratigraphic range of " t . pedum " overlaps the range of the ediacaran fossils in namibia , and probably in spain .
the ediacaran period is not yet formally subdivided , but a proposed scheme recognises an upper ediacaran whose base corresponds to the gaskiers glaciation , a terminal ediacaran stage starting around 557 million years ago , a preceding stage starting around 557 million years ago .
the dating of the rock type section of the ediacaran period in south australia has proven uncertain .
the age range of 635 to 542 million years is based on correlations to other countries where dating has been possible .
the base age of about 635 million years is based on u-pb aarhus uranium-leadrford isochron dating from namibia and china .
applying this age to the base of the ediacaran assumes that cap carbonates are laid down synchronously around the world .
this is controversial because an age of about 580 million years has been obtained for glacial rocks in tasmania .
the age of the top is the same as the widely recognised age for the base of the cambrian period 542nbc wessex wessex wessex wessex wessex wessex wessex wessex wessex wessex .
the fossil record from the ediacaran period is sparse , as more easily fossilized hard-shelled animals had yet to evolve .
the ediacaran biota include the oldest definite multicellular organisms with specialized tissues hanna-type .
their relationship even with the immediately following lifeforms of the cambrian explosion is rather difficult to interpret .
more than 100 genera have been described , and well known forms include " arkarua " , " charnia " , " ediacaria " , " marywadea " , " pteridinium " , and " yorgia " .
scientists believe that the first mass extinction happened during this period when early animals changed the environment .
the relative proximity of the moon at this time meant that tides were stronger and more rapid than they are now .
the day was 21.9 sacks0.4 hours , and there were 13.1 synodic months / year and 400nesian solar days / year .
