In geometry, a parallelepiped is a three-dimensional figure formed by six parallelograms (the term rhomboid is also sometimes used with this meaning).
In this context of affine geometry, in which angles are not differentiated, its definition admits only "parallelograms" and "parallelepipeds".
Three equivalent definitions of "parallelepiped" are The rectangular cuboid (six rectangular faces), cube (six square faces), and the rhombohedron (six rhombus faces) are all specific cases of parallelepiped.
Any of the three pairs of parallel faces can be viewed as the base planes of the prism.
A parallelepiped has three sets of four parallel edges; the edges within each set are of equal length.
Since each face has point symmetry, a parallelepiped is a zonohedron.
The faces are in general chiral, but the parallelepiped is not.
A parallelepiped can be considered as an oblique prism with a parallelogram as base.
Hence the volume formula_1 of a parallelepiped is the product of the base area formula_2 and the height formula_3 (see diagram).
With (where formula_5 is the angle between the vectors formula_6 and formula_7) and the height formula_8 (formula_9 is the angle between vector formula_10 and the normal of the base) one gets The mixed product of three vectors is called triple product.
An alternative representation of the volume uses geometric properties (angles and length of edges) only: with formula_16 and formula_17 the edge lengths.
The volume of any tetrahedron that shares three converging edges of a parallelepiped has a volume equal to one sixth of the volume of that parallelepiped (see proof).
In 2009, dozens of perfect parallelepipeds were shown to exist, answering an open question of Richard Guy.
Coxeter called the generalization of a parallelepiped in higher dimensions a parallelotope.
So a 2-parallelotope is a parallelogon which can also include certain hexagons, and a 3-parallelotope is a parallelohedron, including 5 types of polyhedra.
The diagonals of an "n"-parallelotope intersect at one point and are bisected by this point.
See also fixed points of isometry groups in Euclidean space.
The edges radiating from one vertex of a "k"-parallelotope form a "k"-frame formula_25 of the vector space, and the parallelotope can be recovered from these vectors, by taking linear combinations of the vectors, with weights between 0 and 1.
The "n"-volume of an "n"-parallelotope embedded in formula_26 where formula_27 can be computed by means of the Gram determinant.
Similarly, the volume of any "n"-simplex that shares "n" converging edges of a parallelotope has a volume equal to one 1/"n"!
The word appears as "parallelipipedon" in Sir Henry Billingsley's translation of Euclid's Elements, dated 1570.
In the 1644 edition of his "Cursus mathematicus", Pierre Hérigone used the spelling "parallelepipedum".
The "Oxford English Dictionary" cites the present-day "parallelepiped" as first appearing in Walter Charleton's "Chorea gigantum" (1663).
Charles Hutton's Dictionary (1795) shows "parallelopiped" and "parallelopipedon", showing the influence of the combining form "parallelo-", as if the second element were "pipedon" rather than "epipedon".
The 1989 edition of the "Oxford English Dictionary" describes "parallelopiped" (and "parallelipiped") explicitly as incorrect forms, but these are listed without comment in the 2004 edition, and only pronunciations with the emphasis on the fifth syllable "pi" (/paɪ/ ) are given.
Thus the faces of a parallelepiped are planar, with opposite faces being parallel.