long means of much length .
in mathematics , length is a number with dimension distance .
in most systems of measurement , the unit of length is a base unit .
length is the most extended dimension of an object .
length may be distinguished from height , vertical extent , and width .
length is a measure of one dimension .
measurement has been important since humans settled from nomadic lifestyles and started using building materials , occupying land and trading with neighbours .
many units of length have been used throughout history and in different civilisations and cultures .
for instance one of the oldest units of length measurement used in the ancient world was the cubit , which was the length of the arm from the tip of the finger to the elbow .
this could then be divided into shorter units like the foot .
the cubit could vary greatly because of the different sizes of people .
as trade between different places increased , the need for standard units of length increased .
and later , as society has become more technologically oriented , much higher accuracy of measurement is required in an increasingly diverse set of fields , from micro-electronics to interplanetary ranging .
albert einstein 's special relativity says that length can no longer be thought of as being constant in all reference frames .
thus a ruler that is one meter long in one frame of reference will not be one meter long in a reference frame that is moving relative to the first frame .
the length of an object depends on the object .
in the physical sciences and engineering , when one speaks of units of length , the word length is synonymous with distance .
there are several kinds of length .
historically , units of length may have been derived from the lengths of human body parts , the distance traveled in a number of paces , the distance between landmarks or places on the earth , or arbitrarily on the length of some common object .
in the international system of unitsometric units , the basic unit of length is the metre .
the centimeter and the kilometre are also commonly used units .
in u . s customary units , english or imperial system of units , commonly used units of length are the inch , the foot , the yard , and the mile .
units used to denote distances in the vastness of space , as in astronomy , are much longer than those typically used on earth .
