emperor yozei coinson , yozei-tenno -lrb- 869 – 949 -rrb- , was the 57th emperor of japan , according to the traditional order of succession .
yozei 's reign started in 876 and ended in 884 .
before he became the monarch , his personal namehesis -lrb- " imina " whenever he became king -rrb- was sadaakira " shinno " 王 [unk] 王ocation .
yozei was the oldest son of emperor seiwa .
his mother was fujiwara no takakiko .
yozei 's mother was the sister of fujiwara no mototsune .
in ancient japan , there were four noble clans .
one of these clans , the minamoto clan percival [unk] 氏sitor are also known as genji .
yozei had nine imperial children , born after he abdicated .
yozei was made emperor when he was a young boy .
this was an action that caused massive scandal in the heian court .
during the heian era , japanese society was very sensitive to pollution , both spiritual and personal .
deathsotho 's worst act of pollution was to purify oneself .
pollution of such extreme degree committed by the highest source was seen as extremely ruinous .
many of the high court officials construed emperor yozei 's actions as exceeding the limits of acceptable behavior , and as justifiable cause for the emperor to be forcibly deposed .
in kitabatake chikafusa 's 14th century account of emperor yozei 's reign , the emperor is described as possessing a violent disposition and unfit to be a ruler .
in the end , fujiwara no mototsune , who was " sessho " dwarfs regent for the child-emperor , 876 – 8800 ft . " kampaku " at the time , " kampaku " was chief advisor or first secretary for the emperor , 880 – 890000000 ft . "
yozei lived in retirement until the age of 80 .
the actual place of yozei 's grave is known .
this emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial shinto shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine buddha -lrb- " misasagi " -rrb- at kyoto .
the imperial household agency designates this location as yozei 's mausoleum .
it is formally named " kaguragaoka no higashi no misasagi " .
" kugyo " cupping 公 [unk] [unk] [unk] [unk] [unk] [unk] -rrb- is a term for the very few most powerful men attached to the court of the emperor of japan in pre-meiji eras .
in general , this elite group included only three to four men at a time .
these were hereditary courtiers whose experience and background would have brought them to the pinnacle of a life 's career .
the years of yozei 's reign are more identified by more than one era name .
during this time , the tradition of naming eras was changed .
instead , the name of an era might be chosen to limit the effects of something bad .
she was the daughter of emperor koko 's second daughter .
she was the daughter of emperor koko 's third daughter , yasuko .
she was the daughter of prince koretada 's daughter , princess kyoko .
fujiwara no tonaga 's daughter is fujiwara no .
court lady is the daughter of ki clan .
the court lady is tomo yasuhira 's daughter .
court lady saeki clan is the daughter of saeki clan .
