igor stravinskysecreatic -lrb- 17 june 1882 – 6 april 1971 -rrb- was a russian composer , pianist , and conductor .
he is considered one of the most important and influential composers of the 20th century .
stravinsky 's composition career was notable for its stylistic diversity .
he first became famous in the united states in 1913 with the ballets russes called " the firebird " .
the ballet transformed the way in which subsequent composers thought about rhythmic structure and was largely responsible for stravinsky 's reputation as a musical revolutionary who pushed the boundaries of musical design .
his " russian phase " continued with works such as " renard " , the " soldier 's tale " and " les noces " .
the works from this period tended to make use of traditional musical forms .
in the 1950s stravinsky adopted serial procedures .
his compositions of this period shared traits with examples of his earlier output : rhythmic energy , the construction of extended melodic ideas out of a few two-or three-note cells and clarity of form , and of instrumentation .
stravinsky was born in oranienbaum , a suburb of saint petersburg , russia .
his parents were a well-known bass at the kiev opera house and the mariinsky theatre in st . petersburg .
fyodor was born into a mixed polish-russian family .
stravinsky ’ s ancestry is traceable back to the 17th and 18th centuries , to the bearers of the soulima and strawinski coat of arms .
stravinsky 's family came from stravinskas , polonized lithuanian wouldn or belarussian tailor-owners , and nobles of the grand duchy of lithuania .
stravinsky 's family originally had a soulima-stravinsky surname , and the name " stravinsky " came from the word " strava " , which is one of the variants of the streva river in lithuaniahesis trakai and kaunas district .
he said that " i never came across anyone who had any real attraction for me " .
he studied music theory and tried composition .
in 1890 , he saw a performance of tchaikovsky 's ballet " the sleeping beauty " at the mariinsky theatre .
when he was fifteen he had mastered the piano concerto in g minor and finished a piano reduction of a string quartet by glazunov .
despite his enthusiasm for music and their musical background , his parents expected him to study law .
he studied at the university of stravinsky in stravinsky .
in the summer of 1902 , stravinsky stayed with the composer nikolai rimsky-korsakov and his family in the german city of heidelberg .
by that time his son had already spent more time on his musical studies than on law .
stravinsky was not allowed to take his final law examinations and later received a half-course diploma in april 1906 .
after that , he studied music .
in 1905 , he began to take twice-weekly private lessons from rimsky-korsakov , whom he came to regard as a second father .
these lessons continued until rimsky-korsakov 's death in 1908 .
in 1905 stravinsky was engaged to his cousin katherine gavrylivna nosenko baronetcy called " katya "arth .
their first two children were born in 1907 and 1908 .
in february 1909 , two of stravinsky 's orchestral works were performed at a concert in saint petersburg , where they were heard by serge diaghilev , who was at that time involved in planning to present russian opera and ballet in paris .
he was very impressed by " fireworks " to commission stravinsky to compose a full-length ballet score , " the firebird " .
from about 1890 until 1914 the composer often visited ustilug , a town in the modern volyn oblast , ukraine .
he spent most of his summers there .
in 1907 stravinsky designed his own house in ustilug , which he called " my heavenly place " .
in this house stravinsky worked on seventeen of his early compositions , among them " feu d ' artifice " , " the firebird " , " petrushka " , and " the rite of spring " .
recently renovated , the house is now a stravinsky house-museum open to the public .
many documents , letters , and photographs are on display there .
stravinsky became an overnight sensation following the success of the " firebird " 's premiere in paris on 25 june 1910 .
the composer had travelled from his estate in ustilug to paris in early june to attend the final rehearsals and the premiere of " the firebird " .
his family joined him before the end of the ballet season .
after spending the summer in la baule , brittany , they moved to switzerland in early september .
their second son , sviatoslav soulima was born in lausanne , switzerland .
stravinsky and his family lived in russia during the summer months and spent each winter in switzerland .
during this period stravinsky composed two more ballets for the ballets russes : " petrushka " < 1911 leung , and " the rite of spring " — and " the rite of spring " .
shortly after the premiere of " the rite of spring " on 29 may 1913 , stravinsky contracted typhoid from eating bad oysters .
during the rest of the summer , stravinsky turned his attention to completing his first opera , the " nightingale " whenever he had done .
the work had been paid for by the moscow free theatre for the money of 10,000 rubles .
the stravinsky family returned to switzerland during the fall of 1913 .
milenewyl was born in lausanne , switzerland .
she was confined to the sanatorium at leysin , high in the alps .
igor and the family lived nearby , and he completed " le rossignol " there on 28 march .
in april , they were finally able to return to clarens .
by then , the moscow free theatre had gone bankrupt .
" le rossignol " was first performed at the paris opera on 26 may 1914 .
" le rossignol " had only lukewarm success with the public and the critics .
composers such as maurice ravel , bela bartok , and reynaldo hahn liked the score .
in july , stravinsky made a trip to ustilug to get personal effects .
after world war i , he returned to switzerland .
the war and subsequent russian revolution made it impossible for stravinsky to return to his homeland , and he did not set foot upon russian soil again until october 1962 .
in 1915 stravinsky and his family moved from clarens to morges , a town in lausanne .
the family lived there sumo at three different addressesorine until 1920 .
stravinsky struggled financially .
russia reacts with the ussr because it did not follow the berne convention .
he blamed him for failing to live up to the terms of a contract they had signed .
he approached the swiss philanthropist werner reinhart for financial help while he was writing " l ' histoire du soldat "artharthartharth .
the first performance was conducted by ernest ansermet at the theatre municipal de lausanne .
in gratitude , stravinsky gave the work to reinhart and gave him the original manuscript .
he supported stravinsky ’ s music when he gave concerts in 1919 .
in gratitude to his benefactor stravinsky also dedicated his " three pieces for clarinet "ulsively to reinhart , who was an excellent amateur clarinetist .
in 1920 stravinsky returned to switzerland .
the family left morges for the last time .
when coco chanel heard of their dilemma , coco chanel invited stravinsky and his family to live at her new home " bel respiro " in the paris suburb of garches .
at the same time , chanel also guaranteed the new ballets russes production of stravinsky 's " the rite " of spring " with an anonymous gift to diaghilev , said to have been 300,000 francs .
stravinsky made a business and musical relationship with pleyel .
pleyel essentially acted as his agent in collecting mechanical royalties for his works and provided him with a monthly income and a studio space at its headquarters in which he could work and entertain friends and business friends .
stravinsky agreed to arrange up a lot of his early works for the pleyela , the pleyel 's piano .
he did this without regard for human fingers or hands .
the rolls were not recorded , but were marked up from a combination of manuscript fragments and handwritten notes by jacques larmanjat , musical director of pleyel 's roll department .
among the songs that were issued on the pleyela piano rolls are " the rite of spring " , " petrushka " , " the firebird " , and " song of the nightingale " .
during the 1920s , stravinsky recorded art rolls for the aeolian company in both london and new york , not all of which have survived .
patronage was never far away .
in the early 1920s , leopold stokowski gave stravinsky regular support through a pseudonymous ' benefactor ' .
she met vera de bosset in paris in february 1921 .
in 1921 stravinsky and his family moved to anglet , near biarritz , southwestern france .
from then until his wife 's death in 1939 , stravinsky led a double life , dividing his time between his family in anglet , and vera in paris and on tour .
katya had a mixture of magnanimity , bitterness , and compassion .
in september 1924 , stravinsky bought " an expensive house " in nice : the villa des roses .
from 1931 to 1933 , the stravinskys lived in voreppe , near grenoble , southeastern france .
the stravinskys became french citizens in 1934 and moved to the rue du faubourg saint-honore in paris .
stravinsky later remembered this last european address as his unhappiest , as his wife 's tuberculosis infected both himself and his eldest daughter ludmila , who died in 1938 .
katya had been married for 33 years .
stravinsky himself spent five months in hospital , during which time his mother died .
during his later years in paris , stravinsky had developed professional relationships with key people in the united states : he was already working on his symphony in c for the chicago symphony orchestra and he had agreed to deliver the prestigious charles eliot norton lectures at harvard university during the 1939 – 40 academic year .
stravinsky sailed ashore alone across the united states at the end of the month .
vera and vera were married in bedford , massachusetts , on 9 march 1940 .
he moved to hollywood in 1946 .
he spent more time living in los angeles than any other city .
he became a united states citizen in 1945 .
stravinsky had adapted to life in france , but moved to america at the age of 57 was a very different prospect .
for a while , he maintained a circle of contacts and emigre friends from russia , but he eventually found that this did not sustain his intellectual and professional life .
during world war ii , so many writers , musicians , composers and conductors settled in the area .
he liked british writers , who visited him in beverly hills , like w . h . auden , christopher isherwood , dylan thomas .
they shared the composer 's taste for hard spirits – especially aldous huxley , with whom stravinsky spoke in french " .
stravinsky and huxley had a tradition of saturday lunches for west coast avant-garde and luminaries .
stravinsky 's seventh chord in his arrangement of the " star-spangled banner " led to an incident with the boston police on 15 january 1944 .
the police were wrong .
the law in question merely forbade using the national anthem " as dance music , as an exit march , or as a part of a medley of any kind " , but the incident soon established itself as a myth , in which stravinsky was held in jail for several nights , and photographed for police records .
stravinsky 's professional life included many of its modern classical music styles , and he influenced composers both during and after his lifetime .
among his students was the american composer and music educator robert strassburg .
in 1959 , he was awarded the sonning award , denmark 's highest musical honour .
in the early 1960s his students included robert craft and warren zevon .
in september 1962 stravinsky returned to russia for the first time since 1914 .
during the three week visit he met with soviet premier nikita khrushchev and several leading soviet composers , including dmitri shostakovich and aram khachaturian .
in 1969 , stravinsky moved to new york .
stravinsky wrote several works for the composers he made , especially " the well-tempered clavier " .
on 18 march 1971 , stravinsky was taken to lenox hill hospital with pulmonary edema where he stayed for ten days .
on 29 march , he moved into a newly furbished apartment at 920 fifth avenue , his first city apartment since living in paris in 1939 .
after a period of well being , the edema returned on 4 april and vera insisted that medical equipment should be installed in the apartment .
he died at the age of 88 on 6 april .
the cause of his death certificate is heart failure .
a funeral service was held at the funeral of donald campbell .
he was buried in the russian corner of the cemetery island of san michele in northern italy .
he has a star on the hollywood walk of fame .
he was posthumously inducted into the national museum of dance and hall of fame in 2004 .
stravinsky 's music is usually divided into three general style periods : a russian period , a neoclassical period , and a serial period .
he studied some of the earliest works of the russian period , sometimes called " primitive period " .
these works clearly show the influence of rimsky-korsakov , but as richard taruskin has shown , they also reveal stravinsky 's knowledge of music by glazunov , taneyev , tchaikovsky , dvorak , and debussy , among others .
in 1908 stravinsky composed " funeral song " .
it was lost in september 2015 , when it was put in a back room of the city 's conservatoire .
it was played again for the first time in over a century on 2 december 2016 .
the rediscovery generated much enthusiasm and , as a result , over 25 performances are scheduled in 2017 and beyond .
performances in st . petersburg of " scherzo fantastique " and " feu d ' artifice " attracted the attention of serge diaghilev .
it was first performed in paris , france in 1910 .
like stravinsky 's earlier student works , " the firebird " continued to look backward to rimsky-korsakov not only in its orchestration , but also in its overall structure , harmonic organization , and melodic content .
stravinsky 's ballet " petrushka " is where " stravinsky at last became stravinsky . "
the music of the song is used in addition to two waltzes by viennese composer joseph lanner and a french music hall tune .
in april 1915 , stravinsky received a commission from winnaretta singer ¹ princesse edmond de polignacsuit for a small-scale theatrical work to be performed in her paris salon .
he called this " a burlesque in song and dance " .
" renard " was stravinsky 's first venture into experimental theatre .
" apollon musagete " , " persephone " egypti " ; 1933 – 1947 ; and " orpheus " are not only stravinsky 's return to the classical period but also his exploration of themes from the classical world , such as greek mythology .
important works in this period include the octetriated 1923dilly , concerto for piano and windstern 1924 hamish , the serenade in aletion 1925 ; and " symphony of psalms " ; and the " symphony of psalms " .
in 1951 , he completed his last neoclassical work , the opera " the rake 's progress " .
it was first performed in venice in 1953 .
it was staged by the santa fe opera in 1962 stravinsky festival in honour of the composer 's 80th birthday .
in the 1950s , stravinsky began using serial composition techniques such as dodecaphony , the twelve tone technique originally devised by arnold schoenberg .
he first experimented with non-twelve-tone serial techniques in small-scale vocal and chamber works such as the " cantata " [mask] 1952 fiba , the septetylus 1953hesis and " three songs from shakespeare " .
the first of his compositions fully based on such techniques was " in memoriam dylan thomas " [mask] 1954 fibaj .
" agon " lasted from 1954 to 1956 , and briefly was the first to contain a twelve tone series .
stravinsky expanded his use of dodecaphony in works such as " threni " 6th 1958dilly , and " a sermon , a narrative and a prayer " 6th 6th 6th 6th 6th 6th , which is based on biblical texts , and " the flood " verse verse plays .
stravinsky has been called “ one of music ’ s truly epochal innovators ” .
the most important aspect of stravinsky 's work , aside from his technical innovations — including in rhythm and harmonyials , is the ' changing face ' of his compositional style while always ' retaining a distinctive , essential identity ' .
stravinsky 's use of motivic development is different in different forms of music .
this is where notes are subtracted or added to a motif without regard to the changing of metre .
a similar technique can be found as early as the 16th century , for example in the music of cipriano de rore , orlandus lassus , carlo gesualdo and giovanni de macque , music with which stravinsky showed considerable familiarity .
ostinati is used for the eighth-note ostinato on strings accented by eight horns in the section " augurs of spring spring spring spring spring spring spring spring springrdes " .
the work also contains passages where several ostinati clash against one another .
stravinsky was noted for his distinctive use of rhythm , especially in the " rite of spring "wrotech .
the composer philip glass said that “ the idea of pushing the rhythms across the bar lines . . led the way . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
the rhythmic structure of music became much more fluid and in a certain way spontaneous " .
glass mentions stravinsky 's " primitive , offbeat rhythmic drive " .
stravinsky is perhaps the only composer who has raised rhythm in itself to the dignity of art .
stravinsky 's rhythm and vitality influenced the composer aaron copland .
stravinsky called for a wide variety of orchestral , instrumental , and vocal forces .
stravinsky ’ s musical nature is a basic element of his musical style .
stravinsky ’ s student works such as the symphony in eiology , op . 1 ¥ 1907 1907888888888888888 , " scherzo fantastique " , op . 3oom , op . 3teryx , and " fireworks " fetish " fetish " , for large orchestral forces , called for large orchestral forces .
this is not surprising , as the works were as much exercises in orchestration as in composition .
the symphony , for example , calls for 3 flutes flutes flutes ; 2 oboes ; 3 bassoons ; 4 horns in f ; 3 trombones , tuba , timpani , bass drum , cymbals , and strings .
the " scherzo fantastique " calls for a slightly larger orchestra but completely omits trombones : this was stravinsky ’ s response to rimsky ’ s criticism of their overuse in the symphony .
stravinsky showed a taste in literature that was wide and reflected his constant desire for new discoveries .
the texts and literary sources for his work began with a period of interest in russian folklore .
he also had an inexhaustible desire to explore and learn about art .
not only was he the principal composer for diaghilev 's ballets russes , but he also worked with pablo picasso ª " pulcinella " , 1920 cholera akron , jean cocteaueaueaueau tter rex , 1927 1927 1927 1927 guangzhou , and george balanchinecolor , 1928 · .
his interest in art made him become interested in the art of his life , and in his interest in art propelled him to develop a strong relationship with picasso , whom he met in 1917 .
from 1917 to 1920 , the two were in an artistic dialogue .
this was important to establish how the artists would approach their collaborative space in " pulcinella " .
stravinsky was sympathetic to bourgeois liberalism and the aims of the constitutional democratic party , even composing an anthem for the russian provisional government , before shifting heavily towards the right following october revolution .
in 1930 , he said , " i don ’ t believe that anyone venerates mussolini more than i . . i know many exalted personages , and my artist 's mind does not shrink from political and social issues .
after having seen so many events and so many more or less representative men , i have an overpowering urge to make homage to your duce .
he is the saviour of italy and – let us hope – europe . ”
later , when mussolini gave him a speech , " unless my ears deceive me , the voice of rome is the voice of " il duce " .
i told him that i felt like a fascist myself . . in spite of being extremely busy , mussolini did me the great honour of conversing with me for three-quarters of an hour .
we talked about music , art and politics .
when the nazis placed stravinsky 's works on the list of " entartete musik " , he lodged a formal appeal to establish his russian genealogy .
leave me mr . truman and i 'm satisfied . "
stravinsky made a return visit to his native country and composed a cantata in hebrew , travelling to israel for its performance .
stravinsky proved good at playing the part of a ' man of the world ' , acquiring a keen instinct for business matters and appearing relaxed and comfortable in public .
he was known for his polite , courteous and helpful manner .
stravinsky was said to have been a philanderer and was said to have had affairs with high-profile partners , such as coco chanel .
he never said it himself , but chanel spoke about the alleged affair at length to her biographer paul morand in 1946 .
the accuracy of chanel 's claims has been disputed by both stravinsky 's widow , vera , and by craft .
there is no evidence that chanel and stravinsky had an affair with each other .
the story of the supposed affair was the basis of the novel " coco and igor " protested the same year .
despite these alleged liaisons , stravinsky was considered a family man and devoted to his children .
stravinsky was a devout member of the russian orthodox church during most of his life .
music is well or better able to praise him than the church and all its decoration ; it is the church 's greatest ornament .
although stravinsky was not very outspoken about his faith , he was a deeply religious man .
when he was a child , he was brought up by his parents in the russian orthodox church .
he rebelled against the church and abandoned it by the time he was fourteen or fifteen years old .
throughout the rise of his career he was estranged from christianity and it was not until he reached his early forties that he experienced a spiritual crisis .
after beingfriending a russian orthodox priest , father nicholas , after his move to nice in 1924 , he reconnected with his faith .
he rejoined the russian orthodox church .
robert craft noted that stravinsky prayed every day before and after composing , and also prayed when facing difficulty .
towards the end of his life , he was no longer able to attend church services .
in his late seventies , stravinsky said : " i shall now evaluate the events that , at the end of those thirty years , made me discover the necessity of religious belief .
i was not reasoned into my disposition .
though i admire the structured thought of theologyuouslyngeling anselm 's proof in the " fides quaerens intellectum " , for instancelford it is to religion no more than counterpoint exercises are to music .
i do not believe in bridges of reason or , indeed , in any form of extrapolation in religious matters .
for some years before my actual " conversion " , a mood of acceptance had been cultivated in me by a reading of the gospels and by other religious books .
stravinsky said that he wanted to send them all to hell , then he may have rated the first performance of " the rite " of spring " as a success : it is a famous classical music riot and stravinsky referred to it on several occasions in his autobiography as a " .
there were reports of fistfights in the audience and the need for a police during the second act .
the tumult is open to debate .
in 1998 , " time " magazine named stavinsky one of the 100 most influential people of the century .
he received many famous musicians and became famous as a pianist and a conductor .
in 1923 , erik satie wrote an article about igor stravinsky in " vanity fair " .
satie met stravinsky in 1910 .
in the published article , satie argued that measuring the " greatness " of an artist by comparing him to other artists , as if speaking about some " truth " , is illusory and that every piece of music should be judged on its own merits and not by comparing it to the standards of other composers .
that was exactly what jean cocteau did when he commented on stravinsky in his 1918 book , " the greatest contribution of the story " .
according to " the musical times " in 1923 : all the signs indicate a strong reaction against the nightmare of noise and eccentricity that was one of the legacies of the war . . . what stimulated the works that made up the program of the stra concert which created such a few years ago ?
practically the whole lot are already on the shelf , and they will remain there until a few jaded neurotics once more feel a desire to eat ashes and fill their belly with the east wind .
in 1935 , the american composer marc blitzstein compared stravinsky to jacopo peri and c . p . e . bach , saying that , " there is no denying the greatness of stravinsky .
it is just that he is not great enough . "
blitzstein 's marxist position was that stravinsky wanted to " divorce music from other streams of life " , which is " symptomatic of an escape from reality " .
the composer constant lambert described pieces such as " l ' histoire du soldat " as containing " essentially cold-blooded abstraction " .
lambert continued , " melodic fragments in are completely meaningless themselves .
he describes the cadenza for solo drums as “ musical purity . . achieved by a species of musical castration ” .
he compared stravinsky 's choice of " the drabbest and least significant phrases " to gertrude stein ' everyday they were gay there , they were regularly gay there everyday ' ) " helen furr and georgine skeene " , 1922 1922dilly , " whose effect would be equally appreciated by someone with no knowledge of english .
in his book " philosophy of modern music " , theodor w . adorno described stravinsky as an acrobat and spoke of hebephrenic and psychotic traits in several of stravinsky 's works .
contrary to a common misconception , adorno didn ’ t believe that the music was supposed to contain were its main fault , as he pointed out in a postscript that he added later to his book .
adorno 's criticism of stravinsky is more concerned with the change to positivity adorno found in his neoclassical works .
part of the composer 's error , in adorno 's view , was his neoclassicism , but of greater importance was his music 's " pseudomorphism of painting " , playing offdating time-durationurs of henri bergson .
he said that " one trick characterizes all of stravinsky 's formal endeavors : the effort of his music to portray time as in a circus tableau and to present time complexes as though they were spatial .
this trick , however , soon exhausts itself .
adorno said that the " rhythmic procedures closely resemble the schema of catatonic conditions .
in some schizophrenics , the process by which the motor apparatus becomes independent leads to infinite repetition of gestures or words , following the decay of the ego .
stravinsky was very famous in russia and the ussr rose and fell .
his music was banned from around 1933 until 1962 .
in 1972 , the soviet minister of culture , yekaterina furtseva , ordered soviet musicians to " study and admire " stravinsky 's music and she made hatred toward it .
stravinsky 's music has been criticized for its range of styles .
some early writers , such as aaron copland , elliott carter , and boris de schloezer held somewhat unfavorable views of stravinsky 's works , and virgil thomson , writing in " modern music " .
in 1982 , stravinsky was honored with a postage stamp in the great americans series .
igor stravinsky found recordings a practical and useful tool in preserving his thoughts on the interpretation of his music .
he conducted the first suite from " the firebird " .
in the late 1940s , he made several recordings for rca victor at the republic studios in los angeles .
he also worked with the chicago symphony orchestra , the cleveland orchestra , the new york philharmonic orchestra , the royal philharmonic orchestra and the bavarian broadcasting symphony orchestra .
during his lifetime , stravinsky appeared on several televised telecasts , including the 1962 world premiere of " the flood " on cbs television .
although he made an appearance , the actual performance was conducted by robert craft .
many films and videos of the composer have been preserved .
stravinsky published a number of books during his career .
in his 1936 autobiography " chronicle of my life " , which was written with the help of walter nouvel , stravinsky included his well-known statement that " music is , by its very nature , powerless to express anything at all " .
he wrote his 1939 – 40 harvard university charles eliot norton lectures .
in 1959 , several interviews between the composer and robert craft were published as " conversations with igor stravinsky " .
a collection of stravinsky 's writings and interviews appears under the title " confidences sur la musique "naud actes sud , 2013 naples .
the diaghilev and stravinsky foundation is in the london and the victoria and albert museum in london .
a full catalogue and details of access arrangements are available here .
