Ad hominem (Latin for "to the person"), short for argumentum ad hominem, typically refers to a fallacious argumentative strategy whereby genuine discussion of the topic at hand is avoided by instead attacking the character, motive, or other attribute of the person making the argument, or persons associated with the argument, rather than attacking the substance of the argument itself.
However, the term's original meaning was an argument "calculated to appeal to the person addressed more than to impartial reason".
Under this meaning the term does not refer to a logical fallacy.
This meaning survives in philosophical usage, as explained by the philosopher R. Scott Bakker: "Classical Pyrrhonians argued ad hominem, not in the sense of the logical fallacy of that name, but in the sense that their dialectical strategy necessitates the exclusive utilization of the beliefs, convictions, and assumptions of their interlocutors.
"Ad hominem tu quoque" (literally: "You also") refers to a claim that the source making the argument has spoken or acted in a way inconsistent with the argument.
This is fallacious because a disposition to make a certain argument does not make the argument invalid; this overlaps with the genetic fallacy (an argument that a claim is incorrect due to its source).
The circumstantial fallacy does not apply where the source is taking a position by using a logical argument based solely on premises that are generally accepted.
Where the source seeks to convince an audience of the truth of a premise by a claim of authority or by personal observation, observation of their circumstances may reduce the evidentiary weight of the claims, sometimes to zero.
Guilt by association can sometimes also be a type of "ad hominem" fallacy if the argument attacks a source because of the similarity between the views of someone making an argument and other proponents of the argument.
In philosophical usage "ad hominem" may refer to a dialectical strategy involving the exclusive utilization of the beliefs, convictions, and assumptions of those holding the position being argued against, i.e., arguments constructed on the basis of what other people hold to be true.
In the latter case the issues of the credibility of the person making the statement may be crucial.
It should also be noted that an ad hominem fallacy occurs when one attacks the character of an interlocutor in an attempt to refute their argument.
For example, if one supplies sufficient reasons to reject an interlocutor's argument and adds a slight character attack at the end, this character attack is not necessarily fallacious.
Whether it is fallacious depends on whether or not the insult is used as a reason against the interlocutor's argument.
Canadian academic and the author known as Doug Walton has argued that "ad hominem" reasoning is not always fallacious, and that in some instances, questions of personal conduct, character, motives, etc., are legitimate and relevant to the issue, as when it directly involves hypocrisy, or actions contradicting the subject's words.
The philosopher Charles Taylor has argued that "ad hominem" reasoning (discussing facts about the speaker or author relative to the value of his statements) is essential to understanding certain moral issues due to the connection between individual persons and morality (or moral claims), and contrasts this sort of reasoning with the apodictic reasoning (involving facts beyond dispute or clearly established) of philosophical naturalism.