the komodo dragonacker " varanus komodoensis "arth -lrb- also known as the komodo monitor -rrb- is a species of lizard found in the indonesian islands of komodo , rinca , flores , and gili motang .
it is the largest living species of lizard , growing to a maximum length of 3 m in rare cases and weighing up to 70 kg .
its unusually large size has been attributed to island gigantism , since no other carnivorous animals fill the niche on the islands where it lives .
however , recent research suggests the large size of komodo dragons may be better understood as representative of a relict population of very large varanid lizards that once lived across indonesia and australia , most of which , along with other megafauna , died out after the pleistocene as a result of human activity .
its body size remained stable on flores , one of the small number of indonesian islands where it is currently found , over the last 900,000 years .
these lizards are the main ecosystems in which they live .
komodo dragons will hunt and ambush prey including invertebrates , birds , and mammals .
there are two glands in the lower jaw which secrete several toxic proteins .
the biological significance of these proteins is disputed , but the glands have been shown to secrete an anticoagulant .
komodo dragons ' group behaviour in hunting is very good in the reptile world .
they also eat carrion .
komodo dragons do not attack humans .
the eggs are laid in september .
about 20 eggs are put in an abandoned megapode nest or in a self-dug nesting hole .
the eggs develop for seven to eight months .
young komodo dragons live in trees , safe from predators and cannibalistic adults .
they take 8 to 9 years to mature .
western scientists first saw komodo dragons in 1910 .
their large size and fearsome reputation makes them popular in zoo exhibits .
in the wild , their range has contracted due to human activities , and they are listed as vulnerable by the iucn .
a national park , komodo national park , was created to help protect people .
komodo dragons were first seen by europeans in 1910 .
after 1912 , peter ouwens , the director of the zoological museum at bogor , java , published a paper on the topic after receiving a photo and a skin from the lieutenant , as well as two other specimens from a collector .
the first three live komodo dragons to arrive in europe were in the reptile at london zoo .
joan beauchamp procter made some of the earliest observations of these animals in captivity .
the komodo dragon was the main reason for an expedition to komodo island by w . douglas burden in 1926 .
after returning with 12 preserved specimens and 2 live ones , this expedition provided the inspiration for the 1933 movie " king kong " .
it was also burden who coined the common name " komodo dragon " .
three of his specimens were stuffed and are still on display in the american museum of natural history .
the dutch , realizing the limited number of individuals in the wild , outlawed sport hunting and limited the number of individuals taken for scientific study .
collecting expeditions ground to a halt with the occurrence of world war ii .
at around this time , an expedition was planned in which a long-term study of the komodo dragon would be undertaken .
this task was given to the auffenberg family , who stayed on komodo island for 11 months in 1969 .
during their stay , walter auffenberg and his assistant putra sastrawan captured and tagged more than 50 komodo dragons .
the research from the auffenberg expedition would prove to be influential in raising komodo dragons in captivity .
research has given more light on the nature of the komodo dragon .
the komodo dragon is also known as the komodo monitor or the komodo island monitor in scientific literature .
it is referred to as " ora " , " buaya darat "opped land crocodileractive plants .
the evolutionary development of the komodo dragon started with the genus " varanus " , which originated in asia about 40 million years ago and migrated to australia .
they moved into what is now the indonesian island group .
the komodo dragon was believed to have evolved from its ancestors 4 million years ago .
recent fossils from queensland suggests the komodo dragon evolved in australia before spreading to indonesia .
this slowly became isolated in their present island range as sea levels rose afterwards .
extinct pliocene species of similar size to the modern komodo dragon , such as " varanus sivalensis " , have been found in eurasia .
their common ancestor diverging from a lineage that gave rise to the crocodile monitor monitor monitor monitor monitor monitor monitorliness " varanus salvadorii " of new guinea .
in the wild , an adult komodo dragon usually weighs around 70 kg , although captive specimens often weigh more .
an average adult male will weigh 79 to and measure 2.59 m .
the largest known wild specimen was 3.13 m long and weighed 166 kg , including undigested food .
the komodo dragon has a tail as long as its body , and about 60 frequently replaced , serrated teeth that can measure up to 2.5 cm in length .
its saliva is red because its gums almost completely cover its teeth .
it also has a long , yellow , forked tongue .
komodo dragon skin is reinforced by armoured scales , which contain tiny bones called osteoderms that function as a sort of natural chain-mail .
this rugged hide makes komodo dragon skin a poor source of leather .
as with other varanids , komodo dragons have only one single ear bone , the stapes , for transferring vibrations from the tympanic membrane to the cochlea .
this means they are likely restricted to sounds in the 400 to 2,000 hertz range , compared to humans who hear between 20 and 20,000 hertz .
they were formerly thought to be deaf when a study reported no agitation in wild komodo dragons in response to whispers , raised voices , or shouts .
this was disputed when london zoological garden employee joan proctor trained a captive specimen to come out to feed at the sound of her voice , even when she could not be seen .
the komodo dragon can see objects as far away as 300 m , but because its retina only contain cones , it is thought to have poor night vision .
it can distinguish colours , but has poor visual discrimination of stationary objects .
the komodo dragon uses its tongue to detect , taste , and smell stimuli , as with the vomeronasal sense using the jacobson 's organ , rather than using the nostrils .
with the help of a good wind and its habit of swinging its head from side to side as it walks , a komodo dragon may be able to detect carrion from 4 – away .
it only has a few taste buds in the back of its throat .
its scales have special connections to nerves that help the person feel .
the scales around the ears , lips , chin , and soles of the feet may have three or more sensory plaques .
the komodo dragon likes hot and dry places .
it is most active in the day , although it has some nocturnal activity .
komodo dragons come together only to breed and eat .
they can run fast in short sprints up to 20 km / h , diving up to 4.5 m , and climbing trees proficiently when they use their strong claws .
to catch out-of-reach prey , the komodo dragon may stand on its back legs and use its tail as a support .
as it matures , its claws are used primarily as weapons , as its great size makes climbing impractical .
for shelter , the komodo dragon digs holes that can measure from 1 to wide with its powerful claws and claws .
because of its large size and habit of sleeping in these burrows , it is able to keep body heat during the night and minimise its basking period the morning after .
the komodo dragon hunts in the afternoon , but stays in the shade during the hottest part of the day .
these special resting places , usually located on ridges with cool sea breezes , are marked with droppings and are cleared of plants .
they are strategic locations from which to ambush deer .
komodo dragons do not chew their food .
although they eat mostly carrion , they will often ambush live prey with a stealthy approach .
when prey arrives near a dragon 's ambush site , it will suddenly charge at the animal at high speeds and go for the underside or the throat .
komodo dragons do not deliberately allow the prey to escape with fatal injuries , but try to kill prey outright using lacerating damage and blood loss .
they have been recorded as killing wild pigs in seconds .
komodo dragons have been seen knocking down large pigs and deer with their strong tails .
they can locate a dead animal from a range of up to 9.5 km .
they eat by biting and pulling the carcass down with their claws .
for smaller prey up to the size of a goat , their loosely articulated jaws , flexible skulls , and expandable stomachs allow them to swallow prey whole .
the undigested vegetable contents of a prey animal 's stomach and intestines are avoided .
copious amounts of red saliva the komodo dragons make help to lubricate the food , but swallowing is still a long process .
a komodo dragon may try to speed up the process by ramming the carcass against a tree to force it down its throat , sometimes ramming so forcefully , the tree is knocked down .
this allows it to breathe while swallowing .
after eating up to 80 % of its body weight in one meal , it drags itself to a sunny place to speed digestion .
large dragons can survive on as little as 12 meals a year .
after digestion , the komodo dragon regurgitates horns , hair , and teeth .
after regurgitating the pellet , it rubs its face in the dirt or on bushes to get rid of the mucus .
the largest animals eat first , while the smaller ones follow a hierarchy .
the largest male asserts his dominance and the smaller males show their submission by using body language and hisses .
dragons of equal size may wrestle each other .
losers usually run away , though they have been known to be killed and eaten by winners .
the komodo dragon 's diet is wide-ranging , and includes invertebrates , other reptiles including birds , bird eggs , mammals , monkeys , wild boar , deer , horses , and water buffalo .
komodo dragons will eat insects , eggs , geckos , and small mammals .
they attack and bite humans .
sometimes they eat human corpses , digging up bodies from shallow graves .
this habit of raiding graves caused the villagers of komodo to move their graves from sandy to clay ground and pile rocks on top of them to deter the lizards .
the komodo dragon may have evolved to feed on the extinct dwarf elephant " stegodon " that once lived on flores , according to evolutionary biologist jared diamond .
the komodo dragon drinks by sucking the water into its mouth .
research in 2013 suggested that the bacteria in the mouths of komodo dragons are ordinary and similar to those found in other carnivores .
they have good mouth hygiene .
bryan fry said : " after they are done feeding , they will spend 10 to 15 minutes lip-licking and rubbing their head in the leaves to clean their mouth . . . unlike people have been led to believe that , they do not have chunks of rotting flesh from their meals on their teeth , cultivating bacteria . "
nor do komodo dragons wait for prey to die and track it at a distance , as vipers do .
the observation of prey dying of sepsis would then be explained by the natural instinct of water buffalos , who are not native to the islands where the komodo dragon lives , to run into water after escaping an attack .
the warm , faeces-filled water would then cause the infections .
the study used samples from 16 captive dragonsttered 10 adults and six neonates ashore from three us zoos .
researchers have found a powerful antibacterial peptide from the blood plasma of vk25 .
they test it against multidrug-resistant mdrciful pathogens .
preliminary results of these tests show that drgn-1 is effective in killing bacterial strains and even some fungi .
it has the added benefit of significantly promoting wound healing in both uninfected and mixed biofilm infected wounds .
in late 2005 , researchers at the university of melbourne speculated the perentie dq " varanus giganteus "dillyr errorous , other species of monitors , and agamids may be somewhat venomous .
the team believes that bites from these lizards were caused by a mild envenomation .
bites on human digits by a lace monitor called v . variusaurusaurusaurusaurusaurusaurusaurus showed that there were similar effects .
in 2009 , researchers published more evidence that komodo dragons have a venomous bite .
mri scans of a preserved skull showed that there were two glands in the lower jaw .
they found it secreted several different toxic proteins .
the known functions of these proteins include inhibition of blood clotting , lower blood pressure , muscle paralysis , and the induction of hypothermia .
as a result of the discovery , the previous theory that bacteria were responsible for the deaths of komodo victims was disputed .
other scientists have said that this allegation of venom glands " had the effect of underestimating the variety of complex roles played by oral secretions in the biology of reptiles , produced a very narrow view of oral secretions and resulted in misinterpretation of reptilian evolution " .
these scientists say that reptilian oral secretions are not biologically dispatching prey .
they think that " calling all in this clade venomous implies an overall potential danger that does not exist , misleads in the assessment of medical risks , and confuses the biological assessment of squamate biochemical systems " .
evolutionary biologist schwenk says that even if the lizards have venom-like proteins in their mouths they may be using them for a different function , and he doubts that venom is necessary to explain the effect of a komodo dragon bite .
the eggs are laid in september .
during this period , males fight over females and territory by grappling with one another upon their hind legs , with the loser eventually being pinned to the ground .
these males may vomit or defecate when preparing for the fight .
the winner of the fight will then flick his long tongue at the female to gain information about her receptivity .
females resist their claws and teeth during the early phases of courtship .
therefore , the male must fully restrain the female during coitus to avoid being hurt .
other courtship displays include rubbing their chins on the female , hard scratches to the back , and licking .
copulation happens when the male inserts one of his haemipenes into the female 's cloaca .
komodo dragons have a form of " pair bonds " , a rare form of behavior for lizards .
female komodos lay their eggs from august to september and may use several types of locality .
the females make many hiding nests or holes to prevent other dragons from eating the eggs .
they have an incubation period of 7 – 8 months .
hatching is a hard time for the baby , which breaks out of their eggshells with an egg tooth that falls off before long .
after cutting themselves out , the hatchlings may lie in their eggshells for hours before starting to dig out of the nest .
they are born quite defenseless .
sixteen youngsters from a single nest were on average 46.5 cm long and weighed 105.1 grams .
young komodo dragons make up 10 % of their diets .
the habit of cannibalism may be advantageous in sustaining the large size of adults , as medium-sized prey on the islands is rare .
when the young approach a kill , they roll around in faecal matter and rest in the intestines of animals to deter these hungry adults .
komodo dragons take about 8 to 9 years to mature .
a komodo dragon at the london zoo named sungai laid a clutch of eggs in late 2005 after being separated from male company for more than two years .
at first , scientists thought she had been able to store sperm from her earlier encounter with a male , an adaptation known as superfecundation .
on 20 december 2006 , flora was reported that flora , a captive komodo dragon living in the chester zoo in england , was the second known komodo dragon to have laid eggs : she laid 11 eggs , and seven of them hatched , all of them hatched , all of them male .
scientists at liverpool university in england performed genetic tests on three eggs that collapsed after being moved to an incubator , and verified flora had never been in physical contact with a male dragon .
after flora 's eggs ' condition had been discovered , testing showed that sungai 's eggs were produced without outside fertilization .
on 31 january 2008 , the sedgwick county zoo in wichita , kansas , became the first zoo in the americas to document parthenogenesis in komodo dragons .
the zoo has two adult female komodo dragons .
only two eggs were hatched and hatched .
both hatchlings were males .
komodo dragons have the zw chromosomal sex determination system , as opposed to the mammalian xy system .
male progeny prove flora 's unfertilised eggs were haploid smallpox and doubled their chromosomes later to become diploidloidloidloidium .
she gives her progeny with only one chromosome from each of her pairs of chromosomes .
this single set of chromosomes is duplicated in the egg , which develops parthenogenetically .
eggs getting a z chromosome become zz masovian male ; those receiving a w chromosome become ww and fail to develop .
it has been hypothesis that this reproductive adaptation allows a single female to enter an isolated ecological niche niche niche niche niche niche niche stalling such as an island avail and by parthenogenesis produce male offspring .
despite the advantages of such an adaptation , zoos are cautioned that parthenogenesis may be detrimental to genetic diversity .
attacks on humans are rare , but this species has been responsible for several human fatalities , in both the wild and captivity .
there were 24 attacks on humans , 5 of them fatal .
most of the victims are local villagers living around the national park .
the dragon is a vulnerable species .
the komodo national park was founded in 1980 to protect komodo dragons .
later , the wae wuul and wolo tado reserves were opened on flores to help with komodo dragon conservation .
komodo dragons have to avoid encounters with humans .
juveniles are very shy and will flee quickly into a hideout if a human comes closer than about 100 m .
older animals will also run away from a shorter distance away .
if cornered , they will react aggressively by gaping their mouth , hissing , and swinging their tail .
if they are disturbed further , they may start an attack and bite .
there are anecdotes of unprovoked komodo dragons attacking or preying on humans .
only a very few cases are truly the result of unprovoked attacks by abnormal individuals , which lost their fear of humans .
volcanic activity , earthquakes , loss of habitat , fire , and loss of prey due to poaching , tourism , and illegal poaching of the dragons themselves have all contributed to the vulnerable status of the komodo dragon .
under appendix i of cites cites cites cites citeseux , commercial trade of skins or specimens is illegal .
in 2013 , total population in the wild was 3,222 individuals .
populations remained relatively stable on the bigger islands — komodo and rincarth — but decreased on smaller island such as nusa kode and gili motang , likely due to diminishing prey availability .
on padar , a former population of the komodo dragon became extinct , of which the last individuals were seen in 1975 .
it is widely assumed that the komodo dragon died out on padar after a strong decline of the populations of large ungulate prey .
komodo dragons have been popular in zoos for many years , but not in the wild .
they are , however , rare in zoos because they are susceptible to infection and parasitic disease if captured from the wild .
there were 13 european , 2 african , 35 north american , 1 singaporean , and 2 australian institutions that keep komodo dragons .
the first komodo dragons were shown at london zoo in 1927 .
a komodo dragon was first shown in 1934 at the national zoo in washington , d . c .
the lifespan of these animals was very short , averaging five years in the national zoological park .
studies done by walter auffenberg , which were documented in his book " the behavioral ecology of the komodo monitor " , eventually allowed for more successful managing and reproducing of the dragons in captivity .
a variety of behaviors have been observed from one species .
most individuals are relatively tame within a short time .
komodo dragons have also been seen to play with a variety of objects , including shovels , cans , plastic rings , and shoes .
this behavior is not " food-motivated predatory behavior " .
even seemingly docile dragons may become aggressive , especially when the animal 's territory is invaded by someone unfamiliar .
bronstein was invited in by its keeper , who was invited in by its keeper .
the zoo keeper had told him to take off his white shoes and socks .
although he escaped , he needed surgery to repair his foot .
there are sometimes reports of illegal attempts to trade in komodo dragons .
the most recent attempt was in march 2019 .
the plan was to include shipping the animals to several other countries in southeast asia through singapore .
it was hoped that the animals could be sold for up to 500 million coins .
it was believed that the komodo had been smuggled out of east nusa tenggara province through the port at ende in central flores .
