malden island is a small island in the pacific ocean .
it is one of the line islands .
the lagoon is entirely enclosed by land .
the island is famous for its mysterious prehistoric ruins .
the island is designated as the malden island wildlife sanctuary .
in 2014 the kiribati government established a 12 nmi fishing exclusion zone around each of the southern line islands fragments caroline commonly called millenniumzong , flint , vostok , malden , and starbucklings .
malden island is 242 nmi south of the equator , 150 nmi south of honolulu , hawaii , and more than 4000 nmi west of the coast of south america .
the nearest land is uninhabited starbuck island , 110 nmi to the southwest .
the closest inhabited place is tongarevaiful , 243 nmi to the southwest .
the nearest airport is on kiritimatimonium christmas island nmi to the northwest .
other nearby islands islands belong to jarvis island , 373 nmi to the northwest , vostok island , 385 nmi to the south-southeast , and carolineenay island , 460 nmi to the southeast .
the island is about the shape of an equilateral triangle , with 8 km on a side , aligned with the southwest side running northwest to southeast .
the west and south corners are slightly truncated , shortening the north , east and southwest coasts to about 7 km , and adding shorter west and south coasts about 1 to 2 km2 -lrb- 1 – 1 mi2 -rrb- in length .
there are many small islets in the east central part of the island .
the lagoon is entirely surrounded by land , but only by narrow strips along its north and east sides .
it is connected to the sea by underground channels , and is quite salty .
most of the land area of the island lies to the south and west of the lagoon .
the total area of the island is about 39.3 km2 .
the island is very low , and is at its highest point .
the highest mountains are found along a rim that closely follows the coastline .
the interior forms a depression that is only a few meters above sea level in the western part .
because of this topography , the ocean could be seen from much of malden 's interior .
there is no standing fresh water on malden island .
heavy waves fall all along the coast , forming a narrow white to gray sandy beach .
on the west coast , the white sandy beach is bigger .
because of malden 's isolation and dryness , its vegetation is extremely limited .
sixteen species of vascular plants have been recorded , of which nine are indigenous .
the island is largely covered in " sida fallax " scrub , low herbs and grasses .
few , if any , of the clumps of " pisonia grandis " once found on the island still survive .
coconut palms planted by the guano diggers did not thrive .
introduced weeds , including the low growing woody vine " tribulus cistoides " , now dominate extensive open areas , providing more cover for young sooty terns .
malden is an important breeding island for about a dozen species including masked boobies portsmouth , sula dactylatra , red-footed boobyraphy boobyraphy , tropicbirdsuity , and the great frigatebird " fregata minor " .
there are two kinds of lizards : the mourning geckockotious " lepidodactylus lugubris " kilda and snake-eyed skinkholders .
cats , pigs , goats and house mice were introduced to malden during the guano-digging period .
feral cats and house mice are still present .
small numbers of green turtles nest on the beaches , and hermit crabs abound .
the earliest recorded western sighting of malden island was on march 25,1825 .
on 30 july 1825 , the island was seen again by captain the 7th lord byronrrierrrierrriere , a cousin of the famous poet laureateeux .
she had died of measles during a visit to britain .
the island was named after charles robert malden , the first european to see the island .
andrew bloxam , naturalist of the " blonde " , and james macrae , a botanist travelling for the royal horticultural society , joined in exploring the island and recorded their observations .
malden was the island was first sighted by william clark in 1823 .
at the time of its discovery , the island was uninhabited , but the remains of ruined temples and other structures indicated that the island had been inhabited .
some people think that the " wrecked seamen " , " buccaneers " , " south american incas " , " early chinese navigators " , etc .
in 1924 , the malden ruins were looked at by an archaeologist from the bishop museum in honolulu , who concluded that they were the creation of a small polynesian population which had resided there for several generations earlier .
the ancient stone structures are located around the beach ridges , mostly on the north and south sides .
three of the sites on the northwest side litter are larger than the others .
these sites include house sites , marae , house sites , and graves .
comparisons with stone structures on tuamotu atolls show that a population of between 100 and 200 natives could have produced all of the malden structures .
similar maraes are found on raivavavavae , one of the austral islands .
later settlers found them to be dry or brackish .
in the first half of the nineteenth century , during the heyday of american whaling in the central pacific , malden was visited on a number of occasions by whalers .
in 1918 , schooner " annie larsen " was stranded at malden island .
malden was claimed by the u . s . guano company under the guano islands act of 1856 .
before the american company could start their operations , the island was owned by an australian company under british licence .
this company and its successors exploited the island continuously from the 1860s through 1927 .
writer beatrice grimshaw , a visitor to malden in the guano-digging era , decried the " breuning barrenness of the bit island " , declaring that " . . shade , coolness , refreshing fruit , pleasant sights and sounds : there are none .
for those who live on the island , it is the scene of an exile which has to be endured somehow or other " .
she described malden as having " a little settlement fronted by a big wooden pier , and a plain of low greyish-green herbage , relieved here and there by small bushes bearing insignificant yellow flowers " .
fresh water wells could be dug on the island .
the five or six european supervisors on the island were given " a row of little tin-roofed , one-storeyed houses above the beach " .
grimshaw described these buildings as being " large , bare , shady buildings fitted with wide shelves , on which the men spread their mats and pillows to sleep " .
the food was made of rice , biscuits , yams , tinned beef , and tea .
food for the white supervisors consisted of " tinned food of various kinds , also bread , rice , fowls , pork , goat , and goat 's milk " , but vegetables were hard to come by .
indentured labourers on malden were contracted for one year , paid ten shillings per week plus room and board , and repatriated to their home islands when their contracts expired .
salaries for the supervisors were described as " quite high " .
work hours were 5am to 5 pm , with one hour and 45 minutes given off for meals .
the guano diggers built a unique railroad on malden island .
the people were then loaded with guano .
at the end of the day , the sails were unfurled , and the train cars whisked back to the settlement by the current southeastern winds .
while cars were known to jump the tracks more than once during these trips , the system seems to have worked fairly well .
railroad handcars were also used .
this tramway remained in use on malden as late as 1924 .
although guano digging continued on malden through the early 1920s , all human activity on the island had ceased by the early 1930s .
there were no more human use until 1956 .
in 1956 the united kingdom chose malden as the " instrumentation site " for its first series of thermonuclear ( h-bombarded weapons tests .
british officials said that malden should not be called a " target island " .
the three thermonuclear devices were detonated at high altitude a short distance offshore in 1957 .
the airstrip was constructed on the island by the royal engineers in 1956 – 57 remained usable in july 1979 .
malden was made into a part of the british gilbert and ellice islands colony in 1972 .
the u . s . continued to dispute british sovereignty , based on its nineteenth century guano act claims , until after kiribati became independent .
on 20 september 1979 , representatives of the united states and kiribati met on tarawa atoll in the gilberts group of kiribati .
it was signed in 1983 .
the main value of the island to kiribati is in the resources of the 200 nmi exclusive economic zone which surrounds it , particularly the rich tuna fisheries .
gypsum deposits on the island itself are extensive , but do not appear to be viable under foreseeable market conditions , mainly due to cost of transportation .
some revenue has been realized from ecotourism ; the " world discoverer " , an adventure cruise ship operated by " society expeditions " , visited the island once or twice a year for several years in the mid-1990s .
malden was reserved as a wildlife sanctuary and closed area , and was officially designated as the " malden island wildlife sanctuary " , on 29 may 1975 , under the 1975 wildlife conservation ordinance .
the main purpose of this reservation was to protect the large breeding populations of seabirds .
this sanctuary is administered by the wildlife conservation unit of the ministry of line and phoenix islands development , headquartered on kiritimati .
there is no resident staff at malden .
a fire in 1977 , possibly caused by visitors , threatened breeding seabirds .
