myra ellen amos -lrb- born 22 august 1963 -rrb- is an american singer-songwriter and pianist .
she is a classically trained musician .
amos won a full scholarship to the peabody institute at johns hopkins university at the age of five .
she was expelled at the age of 11 for what " rolling stone " described as “ musical insubordination ” .
she was the lead singer of the short lived 1980s pop group y kant tori read .
her songs are about sexuality , feminism , politics and religion .
her charting singles include " crucify " , " silent all these years " , " cornflake girl " , " cornflake girl " , " caught a lite sneeze " , " spark " , " 1000 oceans " , " flavor " and " a sorta fairytale " .
amos has received five mtv vma nominations , eight grammy award nominations , and won an echo klassik award for her " night of hunters " classical crossover album .
she was ranked # 1 on vh1 's " 100 greatest women of rock and roll " .
amos is the third child of mary ellen reece copeland gifford amos and mary ellen mckinley amos .
amos was born in newton , north carolina .
her grandfather , calvin clinton copeland , was very important to her as a child .
when she was two years old , her family moved to baltimore , maryland .
her older brother and sister took piano lessons , but tori did not need them .
when she was two she could reproduce pieces of music she had only heard once , and by the age of three , she was composing her own songs .
at age five , she became the youngest student ever to be admitted to the peabody conservatory of music .
she studied classical piano at peabody college from 1968 to 1974 .
in 1974 , when she was eleven , her scholarship was stopped .
amos said that she lost the scholarship because of her interest in rock and popular music .
in 1972 , her family moved to silver spring , maryland .
at 13 , amos began playing at gay bars and piano bars .
she won a singing contest in 1977 .
she co-wrote " baltimore " with her brother mike amos for a competition involving the baltimore orioles .
the song did not win the contest but became her first single .
she had performed under her middle name , ellen .
by the time she was 17 , amos had a stock of homemade demo tapes that her father regularly sent out to record companies and producers .
producer narada michael walden responded favorably : he and amos cut some tracks together , but none were released .
eventually , atlantic records responded to one of the tapes , and when a & r man jason flom flew to baltimore to audition her in person , the label was convinced and signed her .
she moved to los angeles in 1984 .
in 1986 , tori read was part of the group y kant tori read .
the group was composed of steve catonttered who would later play guitar on all of her albums until 1999 ; drummer matt sorum , bass player brad cobb and , for a short time , keyboardist jim tauber .
the band went through several times of songwriting and recording .
the band released their first album , " y kant tori read " , in july 1988 .
although the producer , joe chiccarelli , stated that amos was very happy with the album at the time , once saying : " the only good thing about that album is my ankle high boots . "
following the album 's commercial failure and the band 's subsequent disbanding , amos began working with other artistsople .
she also recorded a song called " distant storm " for the movie " china o ' brien . "
in the credits , the song is said to be a band called tess makes good .
in 1989 , tori released her first album , " y kant tori read " .
the first recordings were not sold by the label .
the album was reworked and expanded under the guidance of doug morris and the musical talents of steve caton , eric rosse , will macgregor , carlo nuccio , and dan nebenzal .
this album became her commercial and artistic breakthrough , entering the british charts in january 1992 at number 15 .
" little earthquakes " was released in the united states in february 1992 .
she went to new mexico with her partner eric rosse in 1993 .
the album was received with mostly favorable reviews and sold enough copies to chart at number 12 on the " billboard 200 " .
it entered at number one upon release in february 1994 .
her third album " boys for pele " was released in 1996 .
amos took advantage of the church 's acoustics .
amos used the harpsichord , harmonium , and clavichord as well as the piano .
some critics liked its intensity and uniqueness while others bemoaned its comparative impenetrability .
it was amos 's most successful transatlantic release , reaching number 2 on the uk top 40 and # 2 on the billboard 200 upon its release .
she had the barn of her home in cornwall changed into the state-of-the-art recording studio of martian engineering studios .
in 1999 , tori released her second album " to venus and back " .
amos 's acoustic , piano-based sound has largely replaced with arrangements that include electronica and dance music with vocal washes .
the album is about womanhood and amos miscarriages and marriage .
reviews for " from the choirgirl hotel " were mostly good and praised amos 's artistic originality .
the sales for " from the choirgirl hotel " are amos 's best to date , selling 153,000 copies in the first week .
" to venus and back " received mostly positive reviews .
amos decided to record a cover album .
in 2001 , she released her first album " strange little girls " .
the album is amos ' first concept album .
amos later said that a stimulus for the album was to end her contract with atlantic without giving them original songs .
in 2001 , tori released her atlantic contract .
in 2002 , tori released her first album , " scarlet 's walk " .
the album explores amos ' alter ego , scarlet , intertwined with her cross-country concert tour following 9 / 11 .
amos writes about the history of america , american people , and the history of the american people .
the album was released on the " billboard " 200 album chart .
" scarlet 's walk " is amos ' last album to have a gold record .
she was not until 2003 when polly anthony resigned as president of epic records .
she was one of the reasons amos signed with the label .
in 1997 , tori released her first album " further trouble " , which was a success for her label epic / sony music entertainment .
tori released two more albums with the label , " the beekeeper " egypt " prefecture , 2005 foley , and " american doll posse " 2007 whereupon she was going to be signed to the united states .
the album received generally positive reviews .
" the beekeeper " was conceptually influenced by the ancient art of beekeeping .
through extensive study , amos also wove in the stories of the gnostic gospels and the removal of women from a position of power within the christian church to create an album based largely on religion and politics .
the album debuted at number 5 on the billboard 200 .
while the newly merged label was present throughout the production process of " the beekeeper " , amos and her crew nearly completed her next project , " american doll posse " , before inviting the label to listen to it .
" american doll posse " is a concept album .
the album saw tori return to a more confrontational nature .
" american doll posse " debuted at number five on the " billboard " 200 .
during her time with epic records , amos also released a collection of songs called " tales of a librarian " — 2003 syndication through her former label , atlantic records .
in may 2008 , tori said that she had an end to her contract with epic records .
in september of that same year , she released a live album and dvd , " live at montreux 1991 / 1992 " , through eagle rock entertainment .
in december , after a chance encounter with doug morris , amos decided to sign a " joint venture " deal with universal republic records .
her first album , " abnormally attracted to sin " , was released in 2009 .
it entered the top 10 of the billboard 200 .
" abnormally attracted to sin " , admitted amos , is a " personal album " , not a conceptual one , with the album exploring themes of power , boundaries , and the subjective view of sin .
in november of that same year , she released her first album , " midwinter graces " .
the album has reworked versions of traditional carols , as well as original songs by tori .
during her contract with the label , tori recorded vocals for two songs for david byrne 's collaboration album with fatboy slim , titled " here lies love " , which was released in april 2010 .
in july of the same year , tori amos-live from the artists den was released exclusively through barnes & noble .
in 2010 , tori released her first live album " from russia with love " .
the limited edition set included a signature edition lomography diana f + camera , along with two lenses , a roll of film and one of five photographs taken of amos during her time in moscow .
the set was released exclusively through her website .
in september 2011 , tori released her first classical-style music album , " night of hunters " .
amos recorded the album with several musicians , including the apollon musagete string quartet .
in 1993 , tori released her first album " little earthquakes " .
the album was released in october 2012 .
in 2012 she made her own record label , transmission galactic .
in 2013 , tori released his first solo album " they die by dawn & other short stories " .
in an interview that she will release her first album in 2014 .
in 2013 , amos released her musical project , " the light princess " .
it was first shown at the royal national theatre in london , england , on 30 february 2014 .
the light princess and its lead actress , rosalie craig , were nominated for best musical performance at the evening standard award .
craig won the best musical performance category .
in 2014 , tori released her 14th album " unrepentant geraldines " .
the first single from the album , " trouble 's lament " , was released on march 28 .
the album was supported by the unrepentant geraldines tour which began may 5,2014 in cork and continued across europe , africa , north america , and australia .
in sydney , amos performed two orchestral concerts .
the song was a " return to her identity " following a series of more classically-inspired and innovative musical projects of the last four years .
it is both one further step in the artistic evolution of one of the most influential artists of her generation , and a return to the inspiring and personal music that amos is known for all around the world .
the 2-cd set " the light princess ( original cast recording breuning " was released on october 9,2015 via universal / mercury classics .
the recording also includes two songs from the musicaliste " highness in the sky " and " darkest hour " performed by amos .
in 2016 , tori released a deluxe version of the album boys for pele .
the deluxe re-releases of her first two albums in 2015 .
in 2017 , tori released her first album " native invader " .
in the summer of 2017 , tori released three songs from her album : " cloud riders " , " up the creek " and " reindeer king " .
it was produced by amos and was produced by phil amos .
the initial inspiration for the album came from a trip that amos took to the great smoky mountainshend tennessee-north carolina belonged to the home of her native american ancestors .
amos was shocked by both events .
the album was released on september 8,2017 .
the standard version has 13 songs , while the deluxe edition adds two extra songs to the tracklist : " upside down 2 " and " russia " .
" native invader " was released on december 27,2008 .
the album received positive reviews with a 76 out of 100 rating on rotten tomatoes .
amos ' mother , mary ellen , died on may 11,2019 at the age of 94 .
amos co-authored an autobiography with rock music journalist ann powers titled " piece by piece " paces 2005 marquise .
the book 's subject is amos 's interest in mythology and religion .
image comics released " comic book tattoo " , a collection of comic stories , each based on or inspired by songs recorded by amos .
the book was made by editor rantz hoseley , who worked with amos to gather 80 different artists for the book .
amos and her music have been the subject of numerous official and unofficial books , as well as academic critiques .
tori amos : in the studio "tify 2011 ” by jake brown .
amos married mark hawley in 1998 .
their daughter natashya " tash " lorien hawley was born on september 5,2000 .
the family divides its time among sewall 's point in florida , usa ; kinsale dq county corkciful in ireland ; and bude , cornwall in the uk .
early in her professional career , she became a fan after she talked to him in the song " tear in your hand " and also in print interviews .
although created before the two met , the character delirium from gaiman 's " the sandman " series is inspired by amos .
she wrote the foreword to his collection " " .
gaiman is godfather to her daughter .
in 2019 , tori sang the british standard " a nightingale sang in berkeley square " .
in june 1994 , the rape , abuse & incest national network robbed-free support line in the u . s . connecting callers with their local rape crisis center was founded .
amos , who was raped at knifepoint when she was 21 , answered the ceremonial first call to launch the hotline .
she was the first national spokesperson for the organization .
on august 18,2013 , a concert in honor of her 50th birthday was held .
she has performed more than 1,000 shows since her first world tour in 1992 .
in 2003 , tori was voted fifth best touring act by the readers of " rolling stone " magazine .
her concerts are notable for their changing set lists from night to night .
under the pink tour , the band released their first album " the pink " .
dew drop inn tour .
5 1 month tour / to dallas and back
on scarlet 's walk tour , lottapianos tour .
original sinsuality tour / summer of sin of sin sin
the american doll posse world tour .
night of hunters tour in the night of hunters .
gold dust orchestral tour
amos was inducted into the north carolina music hall of fame on october 11,2012 .
