poker is a family of card games .
poker variants involve betting as part of play , and determine the winner of each hand according to the combinations of players ' cards , at least some of which remain hidden until the end of the hand .
poker games vary in the number of cards dealt , the number of shared or community cards , the number of cards that remain hidden , and the betting procedures .
in most poker games the first round of betting begins with one or more players making some form of a " blind " or " ante " wrestler .
in poker , players make bets on the value of their poker hand .
the action then goes clockwise as each player in turn must either matchiography or " call " legally the maximum previous bet , or fold , losing the amount bet so far and all further involvement in the hand .
a player who matches a bet may also be called raise $ 100 .
the betting round ends when all players have either called the last bet or folded .
if all but one player folds on any round , the remaining player collects the pot without being required to reveal their hand .
if more than one player remains in contention after the final betting round , a showdown takes place where the hands are revealed , and the player with the winning hand takes the pot .
with the exception of initial forced bets , money is placed into the pot voluntarily by a player who believes the bet has positive value or who is trying to bluff other players for various reasons .
thus , while the outcome of any particular hand significantly involves chance , the long-run expectations of the players are determined by their actions chosen on the basis of probability , psychology , and game theory .
poker has become more popular since the beginning of the 20th century .
poker was developed in the early 19th century in the united states .
the game is now popular in the pastime .
in the 1937 edition of foster 's complete hoyle , r . f . foster wrote : " the game of poker , as first played in the united states , five cards to each player from a twenty-card pack , is undoubtedly the persian game of as-nas . "
by the 1990s some people started to challenge the notion that poker is a derivative of as-nas .
in the 1970s , poker became far more popular than it was before .
modern tournament play became popular in american casinos after the world series of poker began , in 1970 .
in the game , players can choose the right to deal a hand with each player .
in a casino , a house dealer handles the cards for each hand , but the buttonhesis typically a white plastic disk is rotated clockwise among the players to show a nominal dealer to determine the order of betting .
the cards are dealt clockwise around the poker table , one at a time .
one or more players are required to make bets .
the dealer shuffles the cards , the player on the chair to his or her right cuts , and the dealer deals the number of cards to the players one at a time , beginning with the player to his or her left .
the cards may be dealt either face-up or face-down , depending on the variant of poker being played .
after the initial deal , the first of what may be several betting rounds begins .
between rounds , the players ' hands develop in some way , often by being dealt additional cards or replacing cards previously dealt .
at the end of each round , all bets are gathered into the pot .
if one player bets , no opponents choose to " call " ballot match foley matchgraphs the bet , and all opponents instead " fold " , the player is awarded the pot , no cards are shown , and the next hand begins .
this is what makes it possible to bluff .
bluffing is a primary feature of poker .
if more than one player remains , there is a showdown , in which the players reveal their previously hidden cards and evaluate their hands .
the player with the best hand wins the pot .
a poker hand is a piece of five cards .
poker is played where a " high hand " or a " low hand " may be the best desired hand .
in other words , when playing a poker variant with " low poker " the best hand is one that contains the lowest cardsromatic .
so while the " majority " of poker game variations are played " high hand " , where the best high " straight , flush etc . " wins , there are poker variations where the " worst hand " wins , such as " low ball , acey-ducey , high lo split " .
to summarize , there can be different types of poker : " high poker " , " low poker " , and " high low split " .
in the case of " high low split " the pot is divided among the best high hand and low hand .
poker has many different kinds of poker .
there are several types of betting .
the three most common structures are known as " fixed limit " , " pot-limit " , and " no-limit " .
in poker , betting and raising must be done by standardized amounts .
if the bet is the first bet , then the player may only bet .
in poker , a player may bet or raise any amount up to the size of the pot .
when calculating the maximum raise allowed , all previous bets and calls , including the intending raiser 's call , are first added to the pot .
the raiser may then raise the previous bet by the full amount of the pot .
in poker , a player may wager their entire betting stack at any point that they are allowed to make a bet .
if a player does not have enough betting chips to fully match a bet , they may go all-in , allowing them to show down their hand for the amount of chips they have remaining .
other poker poker hand rankings may also be called " poker " .
video poker is a poker game which is used to play poker games .
payout is dependent on the hand resulting after the draw and the player 's initial bet .
strip poker is a poker game where players remove clothing when they lose bets .
however , it is usually based on simple variants with few betting rounds , like five card draw .
another game with the " poker " name , but with a vastly different mode of play , is called " acey-deucey " or " red dog " poker .
the game is similar to blackjack in the layout and betting .
the player must have a value in between the first two .
payout is based on the odds that this is possible , based on the difference in values of the first two cards .
other poker games played at casinos against the house include three card poker and pai gow poker .
researchers at the university of alberta , carnegie mellon university , and the university of auckland have also developed a variety of computer poker players .
in january 2015 , a group of researchers from the university of alberta announced that they " essentially weakly solved " heads-up limit " texas hold ' em " with their development of their cepheus poker bot .
cepheus would lose at most 0.001 big blinds per game on average against its worst-case opponent , and the strategy is so " close to optimal " that " it can ' t be beaten with statistical significance within a lifetime of human playing . "
instead , it is to calculate the odds of certain poker poker players .
for example , one might input a hand which contains three cards , the program in question would then return that holding just the 7s results in a 10.37 % chance of an improved hand being drawn .
