e-primeerty is a version of the english language that excludes all forms of the verb " to be " .
d . david bourland , jr . , who had studied under alfred korzybski , devised e-prime as an addition to korzybski 's general semantics in the late 1940s .
the essay quickly generated controversy within the general semantics field .
the first uzbekistann , paul dennithorne johnston , had the title : " to be or not : an e-prime anthology " .
for the second , " more e-prime : to be or not ii " , published in 1994 , he added a third editor , jeremy klein .
bourland sees specifically the " identity " and " predication " functions as pernicious , but advocates eliminating all forms for the sake of simplicity .
bourland and other advocates also suggest that use of e-prime leads to a less dogmatic style of language that reduces the possibility of misunderstanding or conflict .
kellogg and bourland describe misuse of the verb " to be " as creating a " deity mode of speech " , allowing " even the most ignorant to transform their opinions magically into god-likements on the nature of things " .
while teaching at the university of florida , alfred korzybski counseled his students to eliminate the infinitive and verb forms of " to be " from their vocabulary , whereas a second group continues to use " i am , " you are , " they are " statements as usual .
instead , a student was asked to eliminate that emotionally primed verb and to say something else , such as , i feel depressed when . . . . korzybski said " improvement of one full letter " by " that infinitive by using the general letter infinitive by using that grade .
albert ellis suggested using e-prime when discussing psychological distress to encourage framing these experiences as temporary solution focused brief therapy coined and to encourage a sense of agency by specifying the subject of statements .
according to ellis , rational emotive behavior therapy " has favored e-prime more than any other form of psychotherapy .
they lost important speech patterns , such as identities and identification .
an articleiculate written in e-prime and supported a role for e-prime in esl and efl programs concurrently published by the office of english language programs in the state department of the united states , " requiring students to avoid the verb to be taught to be every job of writing . "
