richard bachman is a pen name that is used by stephen king .
at the beginning of stephen king 's career , the general view among publishers was that an author was limited to one book per year , since publishing more would not be unacceptable to the public .
king wanted to write under another name , in order to increase his publication without over-saturating the market for the king " brand " .
he convinced his publisher , signet books , to print these novels under a pseudonym .
in his introduction to " the bachman books , " king says that adopting the nom de plume bachman was also an attempt to make sense out of his career and try to answer the question of whether his success was due to talent or luck .
he did his best to " load the dice against " bachman .
king concludes that he has yet to find an answer to the " talent versus luck " question , as he felt he was outed as bachman too early to know .
the bachman book " thinner "ailing 1984dilly sold 28,000 copies during its initial run .
the pseudonym king originally selected ezio gus pillsbury ringo is king 's maternal grandfather 's name .
richard is a tribute to crime author donald e . westlake 's pseudonym richard stark .
stark is later used in king 's novel " the dark half " .
bachman was inspired by bachman – turner overdrive , a rock and roll band king was listening to at the time his publisher asked him to choose a pseudonym on the spot .
king provided biographical details for him .
he was born in new york city .
he ran a medium-sized dairy farm , writing at night .
his fifth novel was dedicated to his wife , claudia inez bachman , who also received credit for the bogus author photo on the book jacket .
the bachman 's publishers had one child , a boy , who died in an unfortunate , stephen king-ish type accident at the age of six , when he fell through a well and drowned .
in 1982 , a brain tumour was discovered near the base of bachman 's brain .
after bachman 's true identity was revealed , later publicity dispatchesports and " about the author " blurbs parapet revealed that bachman died suddenly in late 1985 of " cancer of the pseudonym , a rare form of schizonomia " .
king dedicated bachman 's early books : " rage " — " the long walk " — and " the running man " — to people close to him .
the link between king and his shadow writer was found in washington , d . c . bookstore clerk steve brown .
brown found publisher 's records at the library of congress .
brown wrote to king 's publishers with a copy of the papers he found .
two weeks later , king telephoned brown himself .
at the time of the announcement in 1985 , king was working on " misery , " which he had planned to release as a bachman book .
in 1987 , the bachman novel " the running man " inspired the paul glaser movie of the same name .
king did not want his name to be on the credits , and the screen credit for the movie went to richard bachman .
king used the " relationship " between himself and bachman as a concept in his 1989 book " the dark half . "
in the book a writer 's darker pseudonym takes on a life of its own .
king gave the movie " the dark half " to richard bachman .
there were plans to make the book a collaboration between the two .
in 1996 , bachman 's " the regulators " came out .
it was a companion novel with king 's " desperation " ; the two novels took place in different universes but featured many of the same characters .
the two book covers were designed to be placed together to form a single picture .
in the foreword by king included with " desperation " he said that there may be another bachman novel left to be " found . "
the next bachman book to be " found " was " blaze . "
" blaze " was an unpublished novel of king 's written before " carrie " or the creation of richard bachman .
for its publication king rewrote , edited , and updated the entire book .
the book was published in 2007 .
king has taken full ownership of the bachman name on many occasions , as with the republication of the first four bachman titles as " the bachman books : four early novels by stephen king " in 1985 .
the introduction , titled " why i was bachman " , shows the whole bachman / king story .
although it was reissued in 1996 , the collection was reissued with a new king essay , " the importance of being bachman " .
richard bachman was also mentioned in stephen king 's " the dark tower " series of books .
in the fifth book , " " , " the sinister children 's book " charlie the choo choo " is written by " claudia y inez bachman . "
the spelling discrepancy of the added ' y ' was later explained as a deus ex machina on the part of " the white " rainfall .
stephen king wrote the novel " " .
after the heath high school shooting , king announced that he would allow " rage " to go out of print , fearing that it might inspire similar tragedies .
" rage " for a time continued to be available in the uk in " the bachman books " collection , although the collection now no longer contains " rage " .
in a footnote to the preface of " blaze , " dated 30 january 2007 , king wrote of " rage " : " now out of print , and a good thing . "
king 's other bachman novels are available in the u . s . in separate volumes .
he also appeared on the television series " sons of anarchy " .
his character , named bachman , performed contract work quietly getting rid of dead bodies .
in issue 29 of the comic adaptation of " the stand " , richard ashore bachman appears as one of the top lieutenants of randall flagg , replacing the character of whitney horgan from the original novel .
he is drawn to look like king .
richard bachman is the pseudonym of stephen king .
king 's novel , " rage " , had its title page used as a prop for the killer to write a note to the police .
