animal farm is a short novel by george orwell .
the book tells the story of a group of farm animals who rebel against their farmer .
the farm ends up as bad as it was before , under the dictatorship of a pig named napoleon .
the fable was about the events leading up to the russian revolution of 1917 and then on into the stalinist era of the soviet union .
orwell was a critic of joseph stalin .
the soviet union , he believed , had become a brutal dictatorship , built upon a cult of personality and enforced by a reign of terror .
in a letter to yvonne davet , orwell described " animal farm " as a satirical tale against stalingraphs " " " " " " " " " colours " .
the original title was " animal farm : a fairy story , " but u . s . publishers dropped the subtitle when it was published in 1946 .
other subtitles include subtitles like " a satire " and " a contemporary satire " .
orwell suggested the title " " for the french translation , which abbreviates to ursa , the latin word for bear , a symbol of russia .
it also played on the french name of the soviet union , " " .
he wrote the book between november 1943 and february 1944 .
the manuscript was rejected by a number of british and american publishers .
it became a great commercial success when it did appear partly because the wartime alliance gave way to the cold war .
" time " magazine chose the book as one of the 100 best english-language novels kiran 1923 to 2005 completion .
it won a hugo award in 1996 .
the farm near willingdon , england , is ripened for rebellion by neglect at the hands of the irresponsible and alcoholic farmer mr . jones .
one night , the old major organizes a meeting , at which he calls for the overthrow of humans and teaches the animals a revolutionary song called " beasts of england " .
when old major dies , two young pigs , snowball and napoleon , assume command and stage a revolt .
the most important of these is , " all animals are equal " .
the decree is painted in large letters on one side of the barn .
napoleon teaches the animals to read and write .
the farm runs smoothly .
the pigs elevate themselves to positions of leadership and set aside special food items , ostensibly for their personal health .
following an unsuccessful attempt by mr . jones and his associates to retake the farm , later dubbed the " battle of the cowshed " , snowball announces his plans to modernize the farm by building a windmill .
napoleon has his dogs chase snowball away and he declares himself leader .
napoleon enacts changes to the rules of the farm .
napoleon claims credit for the windmill idea .
the animals work harder with the promise of easier lives with the windmill .
napoleon and squealer discover the animals that snowball is trying to sabotage their project .
when some animals recall the battle of the cowshed , napoleon bonaparte was nowhere to be found during the battle .
" beasts of england " is replaced with an anthem glorifying napoleon , who appears to be adopting the lifestyle of a man .
the animals remain convinced that they are better off than they were under mr . jones .
mr . frederick , a farmer , attacks the farm .
although the animals win the battle , they do so at great cost , as many , including boxer the workhorse , are wounded .
the first windmill in the world collapses .
although boxer is taken away in a knacker 's van , squealer quickly assures the animals that the van had been bought from the knacker by an animal hospital and that the previous owner 's signboard had not been repainted .
squealer subsequently reports boxer 's death and martyrizes him with a festival the following day .
napoleon and his inner circle bought some of the money to buy whisky .
years pass , the windmill is rebuilt , and another windmill is built .
the idea which snowball discussed , including stalls with electric lighting , heating , and running water , are forgotten .
boxer and boxer are also allowed to fight in the rebellion .
mr . jones , having moved away after giving up on reclaiming his farm , has also died .
the pigs start to look like humans .
the seven commandments are written down to just two phrases : " all animals are equal , but some animals are more equal than others . "
and “ four legs good , two legs better ” .
napoleon holds a dinner party for the pigs and local farmers .
he abolishes the practice of the revolutionary traditions and restores the name " the manor farm " .
the men and pigs start playing cards .
both napoleon and mr . pilkington , one of the farmers , play the ace of spades at the same time and both sides begin fighting loudly over who cheated first .
when the animals outside look at the pigs and men , they can no longer distinguish between the two .
george orwell wrote the manuscript in 1943 and 1944 after his experiences during the spanish civil war .
in the preface of a 1947 ukrainian edition of " animal farm " , he explained how escaping the communist purges in spain taught him " how easily totalitarian propaganda can control the opinion of enlightened people in democratic countries " .
this motivated orwell to expose and strongly condemn what he saw as the stalinist corruption of the original socialist ideals .
after seeing arthur koestler 's best-selling " darkness at noon " about the same war , orwell decided that fiction was the best way to describe totalitarianism .
immediately before the book was published , orwell quit the bbc .
he was also upset about a booklet for propagandists the ministry of information had put out .
the booklet included instructions on how to quell ideological fears of the soviet union , such as directions to say that the red terror was a figment of nazi imagination .
at first , orwell encountered difficulty getting the manuscript published .
four publishers refused ; one had originally accepted the work , but declined it after consulting the ministry of information .
the first edition was published in 1945 .
during the second world war , orwell said that anti-soviet literature was not something which most major publishing houses would touch .
eliot wrote back to orwell praising the book 's " good writing " and " fundamental integrity " , but said that they would only accept it for publication if they had some sympathy for trotskyite " .
eliot said he found the view " not convincing " .
orwell let andre deutsch , who was working for nicholson & watson in 1944 , read the typescript .
in his " london letter " on 17 april 1944 for " partisan review " , orwell wrote that it was " now next door to impossible to get anything against russian printed .
anti-russian books do appear , but mostly from catholic publishing firms and always from a religious or frankly reactionary angle .
the publisher jonathan cape , who had initially accepted " animal farm " , subsequently rejected the book after an official at the british ministry of information warned him off .
he wrote to leonard moore , a partner in the literary agency of christy & moore , who published the decision .
such anti-soviet bias was unacceptable , and the choice of pigs as the dominant class was thought to be especially offensive .
it may reasonably be assumed that the ' important official ' was a man named peter smollett , who was later unmasked as a soviet agent .
orwell was suspicious of smollett / smolka , and he would be included in his list of crypto-communists and fellow travellers sent to the information research department in 1949 .
frederic warburg also faced pressures against publication , even from people in his own office and from his wife pamela , who felt that it was not the moment for ingratitude towards stalin and the heroic red army , which had played a major part in defeating adolf hitler .
a russian translation was printed in the paper " posev " .
a translation in ukrainian was taken in large part by the american wartime authorities and handed over to the soviet repatriation commission .
in october 1945 , orwell wrote to frederic warburg .
low had written a letter saying that he had " a good time with " animal farm " — an excellent bit of satire — it would illustrate perfectly . "
nothing came of this , and a trial issue produced by secker & warburg in 1956 illustrated by john driver was abandoned , but the folio society published an edition illustrated by quentin blake and an edition illustrated by the cartoonist ralph steadman was illustrated by the cartoonist ralph steadman .
orwell originally wrote a preface complaining about british self-censorship and how the british people were suppressing criticism of the ussr , their world war ii ally : although the first edition allowed space for the preface , it was not included , and as of june 2009 most editions of the book have not included it .
the first edition of animal farm was published in 1945 .
the publisher had provided space for a preface in the author 's proof composited from the manuscript .
no preface was supplied , and the page numbers had to be renumbered at the last minute .
in 1972 , angus found the first typescript titled " the freedom of the press " .
orwell 's essay was criticized by the press , specifically the suppression of unflattering descriptions of stalin and the soviet government .
the same essay also appeared in the italian 1976 edition of " animal farm " with another introduction by crick .
other publishers were declining to publish it .
reviews of the work were positive .
he wrote in the american " new republic " magazine .
it seemed dull .
the allegory turned out to be a creaking machine for saying in a clumsy way things that have been said better directly . "
soule believed that the animals were not consistent with their real-world inspirations , and said , " it seems to me that the failure of this book commercially it is already assured of tremendous successocation arises from the fact that the satire deals not with something the author has experienced , but rather with stereotyped ideas about a country which he probably does not know very well " .
" the guardian " on 24 august 1945 called " animal farm " a delightfully humorous and fun fun fun of the rule of the many by the few " .
tosco fyvel , writing in " tribune " on the same day , called the book " a gentle satire on a certain state and on the illusions of an age which may already be behind us . "
julian symons responded , on 7 september , " tribune " at least , acknowledgement of the fact that it is a satire not at all gentle upon a particular state — soviet russia ?
it seems to me that a reviewer should have the courage to identify napoleon with stalin , and snowball with trotsky .
today it is a political satire with a good deal of point .
animal farm has been talked about in many decades since these early remarks .
the cia from 1952 to 1957 in operation aedinosaur sent millions of balloons carrying copies of the novel into poland , hungary , and czechoslovakia , whose air forces tried to shoot the balloons down .
the pigs snowball , napoleon , and squealer adapt old major 's ideas into " a complete system of thought " .
napoleon and squealer did activities associated with the humans ashore drinking alcohol , sleeping in beds , trading posts , which were prohibited by the seven commandments .
this is a list of the leaders of the soviet government to use their beliefs about themselves and their society .
these commandments are distilled into the maxim " four legs good , two legs bad ! "
it is mainly used by the sheep on the farm .
later , napoleon and his pigs secretly revise some commandments to clear themselves accusations of law-breaking .
eventually , these are replaced with the maxims , " all animals are equal , but some animals are more equal than others " , and " four legs good , two legs better ! "
pigs become more human .
this is a ironic twist to the original purpose of the seven commandments , which were supposed to keep order within animal farm by uniting the animals together against the humans and preventing animals from being following the humans ' evil habits .
through the revision of the commandments , orwell demonstrates how political dogma can be turned into malleable propaganda .
jeffrey meyers has written , " virtually every detail has political significance in this allegory . "
in 1946 , " of course i intended it primarily as a satire on the russian revolution . . . and " that kind " of revolution .
in a preface for a 1947 ukrainian edition , he stated , " . . for the past ten years i have been convinced that the destruction of the soviet myth was essential if we wanted a revival of the socialist movement .
on my return from spain in 1937 i thought of exposing the soviet myth in a story that could be easily understood by almost anyone and which could be easily translated into other languages .
the october 1917 bolshevik revolution made the animals against farmer jones .
the battle of the cowshed was a battle that was fought in 1918 for the allied invasion of soviet russia and the defeat of the white russians in the russian civil war .
the pigs rise to pre-eminence mirrors the rise of stalinist bureaucracy in the ussr , just as napoleon 's emergence as the farm 's sole leader reflects stalin 's emergence .
the pigs ' appropriation of milk and apples for their own use , " the turning point of the story " as orwell termed it in a letter to dwight macdonald , stands as an analogy for the crushing of the left-wing 1921 kronstadt revolt against the bolsheviks , and the difficult efforts of the animals to build the windmill .
the puppies controlled by napoleon parallel the secret police in the stalinist structure .
orwell tells the purges , confessions and show trials of the late 1930s .
these contributed to orwell 's belief that the bolshevik revolution had been corrupted and the soviet system become rotten .
peter edgerly firchow and peter davison consider that the " battle of the windmill " represents world war ii , especially the battle of stalingrad and the battle of moscow .
during the battle , orwell first wrote , " all the animals , including napoleon " .
this was because of stalin 's decision to remain in moscow during the german advance .
orwell asked the change after he met joseph czapski in paris in march 1945 .
czapski , a survivor of the katyn massacre and an opponent of the soviet regime , told orwell , that it had been " the character and greatness of stalin " that saved russia from the german invasion .
other connections that writers have suggested that writers have illustrated the history of russia from 1917 to 1943 include the rebelliousness that ran through the countryside after the rebellion .
the book 's close , with the pigs and men in a kind of fighting , showed orwell 's view of the 1943 teheran conference that seemed to show the establishment of " the best possible relations between the ussr and the west " .
the disagreement between the allies and the start of the cold war is suggested when napoleon and pilkington , both suspicious , " played an ace of spades simultaneously " .
the music in the novel starts with " beasts of england " and the later anthems .
animal farm has been made into movies and television .
both differ from the novel and have been accused of taking significant liberties , including sanitising some aspects .
in 2012 , an hfr-3d version of animal farm , was announced .
a bbc radio version was made in january 1947 .
he listened to the production at his home in canonbury square , london , with hugh gordon porteous , amongst others .
orwell later wrote to heppenstall that porteous , " who had not read the book , grasped what was happening after a few minutes . "
a further radio production , again using orwell 's own dramatisation of the book , was shown in january 2013 on bbc radio 4 .
tamsin greig narrated , and the cast included nicky henson as napoleon , toby jones as the propagandist squealer , and ralph ineson as boxer .
a theatrical version was staged at the national theatre london on 25 april 1984 .
it toured nine cities in 1985 .
a solo version , adapted and performed by guy masterson , premiered at the traverse theatre edinburgh in january 1995 and has toured worldwide since .
in 1950 norman pett and his writing partner don freeman were secretly hired by the british foreign office to adapt " animal farm " into a comic strip .
this comic was not published in the u . k .
