the narrator tells us that from an early age he has loved animals ; he and his wife have many pets .
when he tries to seize it , the panicked cat bites the narrator .
the cat runs in terror at his master 's approach .
" but this feeling soon gave place to irritation .
and then came , as if to my final and irrevocable overthrow , the spirit of perverseness . "
that very night his house mysteriously catches fire .
the next day , the narrator returns to the ruins of his home to find the single wall that survived the fire .
at first , this image deeply disturbs the narrator , but gradually he determines a logical explanation for it ; someone outside had cut the cat from the tree and thrown its corpse into the bedroom to wake him during the fire .
the narrator begins to miss pluto and hate himself .
later , he finds a similar cat in a tavern .
the only difference is a large white patch on the animal 's chest .
the narrator takes it home , but soon begins to fear and loathe the creature .
this terrifies and angers him more , and he avoids the cat whenever possible .
one day , the narrator and his wife are visiting the cellar in their new home .
to hide her body he removes bricks from a hole in the wall .
a few days later , when the police come to the house to investigate the wife 's disappearance , they find nothing and the narrator goes free .
this gives him the freedom to sleep , even with the burden of murder .
the narrator goes with the police into the cellar .
then , completely confident in his own safety , the narrator comments on the sturdiness of the building and raps upon the wall he had built around his wife 's body .
readers immediately responded positively to the story .
in the beginning of the story , the narrator says that the reader would be " mad indeed " if the reader should expect a reader to believe the story , implying that he has already been accused of madness .
he thinks of her as another pet , seeing as he distrusts and dislikes humans .
he did not understand his excessive love of animals .
the narrator 's perverse actions are brought on by his alcoholism , a " disease " and " fiend " which also destroys his personality .
the black cat is used in disguise as the narrator 's wife says they are all witches in disguise .
in his " instinct vs reason-a black cat " he said : " the writer of this article is the owner of one of the most remarkable black cats in the world-and this is saying much ; for it will be remembered that black cats are all of them witches . "
in scottish and irish mythology , the cat sith is described as being a black cat with a white spot on its chest .
the cat in the poem is named pluto after the roman god of the underworld .
although pluto is a neutral character at the beginning of the story , he becomes antagonistic in the narrator 's eyes when the narrator becomes an alcoholic .
the alcohol pushes the narrator into fits of anger and violence .
when the narrator cuts pluto 's eye from its socket , this can be seen as symbolic of self-inflicted partial blindness to his own vision of moral goodness .
the only remainder is the impression of pluto upon the wall , which shows his unforgivable and incorrigible sin .
from a rhetorician 's standpoint , an effective scheme of omission that poe uses is diazeugma , or using many verbs for one subject ; it omits pronouns .
