terence hanbury whitettered 29 may 1906 – 17 january 1964orf was an english author .
one of his most memorable is the first of the series , " the sword in the stone " , published as a stand-alone book in 1938 .
he was born in bombay , british india .
his parents separated when he was 14 .
white went to cheltenham college in gloucestershire , a public school , and queens ' college , cambridge .
potts became a lifelong friend and correspondent .
while at queens ' college , white wrote a thesis on thomas malory 's " le morte d ' arthur " , and graduated in 1928 with a first-class degree in english .
white then went to stowe school in buckinghamshire for four years .
in 1936 he published " england have my bones " .
the same year , he left stowe school and lived in a workman 's cottage nearby .
white also became interested in aviation , partly to conquer his fear of heights .
white 's novel " earth stopped " egypt -lrb- 1934 -rrb- and its sequel " gone to ground " ; 1935 -rrb- are science fiction novels about a disaster that devastates the world .
" gone to ground " contains several fantasy stories told by the survivors that were later reprinted in " the maharajah and other stories " .
white wrote to a friend that in autumn 1937 , " i got desperate among my books and picked malory up in lack of anything else .
i was thrilled and astonished to find that ƒ aifice the thing was a perfect tragedy , with a beginning , a middle and an end implicit in the beginning and ending in the beginning . anyway , i somehow started writing a book . "
the book was called " the sword in the stone " .
it tells the story of arthur 's boyhood .
white was influenced by freudian psychology and his lifelong involvement in natural history .
" the sword in the stone " was critically well-received and was a book of the month club selection in 1939 .
in february 1939 , white moved to doolistown in county meath , ireland .
in ireland , he wrote most of what would later become " the once and future king " ; two sequels to " the sword in the stone " were published during this time : " the witch in the wood " and " the ill-made knight " in 1939 , and " the ill-made knight " in 1940 .
the version of " the sword in the stone " included in " the once and future king " differs in several respects from the earlier version .
it is darker , and some critics prefer the original version .
the war had a big effect on these tales of king arthur .
in 1946 , white settled in alderney , the third-largest channel island .
the same year , white published mistress masham 's repose , a children 's book .
mistress masham 's repose was influenced by john masefield 's book " the midnight folk " .
in 1947 , he published " the elephant and the kangaroo " .
in the early 1950s , white published two books .
" the age of scandal " excavated in 1950 .
" the goshawk " is an account of white 's attempt to train a northern goshawk using traditional , rather than modern , falconry techniques .
it was written at his cottage in the mid-1930s .
in 1954 , he translated and edited " the book of beasts " , an english translation of a medieval bestiary , originally written in latin .
in 1958 , he completed the fourth book of the " candle in the wind " sequence .
white lived to see his work adapted as the broadway musical " camelot " egypt , 1960 – 61 , and the animated movie " the sword in the stone " – 1963 .
white died on 17 january 1964 aboard ship in piraeus , athens , greece , during a lecture tour in the united states .
he is buried in first cemetery in athens .
in 1977 " the book of merlyn " was published .
his papers are held by the university of texas at austin .
according to sylvia townsend warner 's 1967 biography , white was " a homosexual and a sado-masochist . "
he had no long romantic relationships .
in his diaries of zed , a young boy , he wrote : " i have fallen in love with zed . . the whole situation is an impossible one .
all i can do is behave like a gentleman .
it has been my hideous fate to be born with an infinite capacity for love and joy with no hope of using them . "
broadcaster robert robinson published an account of a conversation with white .
robinson concluded that this was really a cover for homosexuality .
julie andrews wrote in her autobiography , " i believe tim may have been an unfulfilled homosexual , and he suffered a lot because of it . "
he was friend and literary agent david higham , who said , " tim was no homosexual , though i think at one time he had feared he was stripped and in his ethos fear would have been the word edit . "
higham gave warner the address of one of white 's lovers .
but she never took the step .
so she was able to present tim in such a light that a reviewer could call him a raging homosexual .
a heterosexual affair would have made her blush .
lin carter in his book " imaginary worlds " , which was about white as a man who felt deeply but was unable to form close human relationships due to his unfortunate childhood : " he was a man with an enormous capacity for loving .
it shows in his prodigious correspondence and in his affection for dogs .
white was agnostic , and towards the end of his life a heavy drinker .
he was afraid of the human race .
fantasy writer michael moorcock enjoyed white 's " the once and future king " , and was especially influenced by the realism in his work .
later , he said that " white gave me some very good advice on how to write " .
j . k . rowling has said that white 's writing strongly influenced the " harry potter " books .
he said that he did not think rowling had based her character on hunter .
" i said to the reporter that i thought we were both stealing from t . h . white : very straightforward . "
gregory maguire was influenced by " white 's ability to be intellectually broadminded , to be comic , to be poetic , and to be fantastic " in the writing of his 1995 novel " wicked " , and crime fiction writer ed mcbain also cited white as an influence .
white won the 2014 samuel johnson prize for non-fiction .
one of the parts of the book is a biographical account of white and also " the goshawk " , an account of his own failed attempt to train a hawk .
