in mathematics , a finitary relation is a property that gives real real real property values .
typically , the property describes a possible connection between the components of a k-tuple .
for a given set of k-tuples , a truth value is given to each k-tuple according to whether the property does or does not hold .
when " k " = 2 , one has the most common version , a binary relation .
the next section is defined in the section .
in this section we introduce the idea of a relation with a familiar everyday example .
" x " thinks that " y " likes " z " " .
each row of the table records a fact or says that " y " likes " z " " .
for instance , the first row says , in effect , " alice thinks that bob likes denise " .
it is usual to write " s "ropolis alice , bob , denise osaka prefecture to say the same thing as the first row of the table .
the relation " s " is a " ternary " relation , since there are " three " items involved in each row .
the relation itself is a mathematical object defined in terms of concepts from set theory abstractly i . e . , the relation is a subset of the cartesian product oniable person x , person zigraphy , that carries all of the information from the table in one neat package .
a mathematically , then , a relation is simply an ordered set .
the table for relation " s " is an example of a relational database .
the theoretical aspects of databases are the specialty of one branch of computer science .
computer scientists , logicians , and mathematicians , tend to see different things when they look at these concrete examples and samples of the more general concept of a relation .
for one thing , databases are designed to deal with empirical data , and experience is always finite , whereas mathematics at the very least concerns itself with potential infinity .
this difference in perspective brings up a number of ideas that may be usefully introduced at this point , if by no means covered in depth .
the variable formula _ 1 gives the number of places in the relation , 3 for the above example , is a non-negative integer , called the relation 's " arity " , " adicity " , or " dimension " .
a relation with formula _ 1 places is variously called a-ary , a formula _ 1-adic , or a formula _ 1-dimensional relation .
relations with a finite number of places are called finite-place relations .
infinitary relations between infinitudes of individuals , for example infinite sequences .
since there is only one 0-tuple , the so-called empty tuple , there are only two zero-place relations : the one that always holds , and the one that never holds .
the base case is sometimes used to construct a induction argument .
relations between two countries are called unary relations .
for instance , any setoffs such as the collection of nobel laureates ¥ can be viewed as a collection of individuals having some propertyforms such as that of having been awarded the nobel prize ashore .
two-place relations are called binary relations .
a formula _ 1-ary relation is a generalization of a binary relation .
a relation " l " over the sets " x " , . . . " x " is a subset of their cartesian product , written " l " ⊆ " x " x " × " x " x " x " x " x " × " x " x " .
relations are classified according to the number of sets in the defining cartesian product , in other words , according to the number of terms following " l " .
hence : relations with more than four terms are usually referred to as n-ary or n-ary .
a ' k '-ary relation is a set of " k "-tuples .
the second definition makes use of an idiom that is common in mathematics .
in the case of a relation " l " over " k sets , there are " k " + 1 things to specify , namely , the " k " sets plus a subset of their cartesian product .
in the idiom , this is expressed by saying that " l " is a ( " k " + 1 [mask]-tuple .
a relation " l " over the sets " x " , . .
" g " nedra is called the graph of " l " .
elements of a relation are usually denoted by using boldface characters .
a statement of the form " a is in the relation " l " or " a satisfies " l " is taken to mean that a is in " l " under the first definition and that a is in " g " œ " -lrb- ¥ -rrb- under the second definition .
as a rule , whatever definition best fits the application at hand will be chosen for that purpose .
if it becomes necessary to distinguish the two definitions , an entity satisfying the second definition may be called an embedded or included relation .
if " l " is a relation over the domains " x " , . . , " x " , " x " , " , " x " , " , " x " , " , " x " , that are said to " range over " the respective domains .
let a boolean domain b be a two-element set , say , b = < 0,1 !
the characteristic function of the relation " l " , written " ƒ " or χ foley " l " l " skulls " is the boolean-valued function " × " x " → b , defined in such a way that " x " × " x " → b , defined in such a way that " kaurus " = just in case the " k " tuple " is the relation is in the " tuple " .
such a function can also be called an indicator function , particularly in probability and statistics , to avoid confusion with the notion of a characteristic function in probability theory .
it is usually used in mathematics , computer science , and statistics to refer to a boolean-valued function like " ƒ " as a " k "-place predicate .
from formal logic and model theory , the relation " l " constitutes a " logical model " or a " relational structure " that serves as one of many possible interpretations of some " k "-place predicate symbol .
there is considerable variation in terminology .
this article describes a relation as the set-theoretic extension of a relational concept or term .
the logical comprehension is the totality of intensions or abstract properties that all of the elements of the relation in extension have in common , or else the symbols that are taken to denote these elements and intensions .
some writers of the latter persuasion introduce terms with more concrete connotations , like " relational structure " , for the set-theoretic extension of a given relational concept .
the logician augustus de morgan , in work published around 1860 , was the first to articulate the notion of relation in anything like its present sense .
he also stated the first formal results in the theory of relationsttered on de morgan and relations , see merrill 1990 nedra .
charles sanders peirce restated and extended de morgan 's results .
in the 19th century peirce , gottlob frege , georg cantor , richard dedekind , and others advanced the theory of relations .
many of their ideas , especially on relations called orders , were summarized in principles of mathematicsologist bertrand russell .
russell and a . n . whitehead made free use of these results in their " principia mathematica " .
