giovanni paisielloylus -lrb- may 9,1740 – june 5,1816 -rrb- was an italian composer .
his works were praised and inspired haydn , mozart , salieri and beethoven .
paisiello was born in taranto in the apulia region .
in 1754 he was sent to the conservatorio di s . onofrio at naples , where he studied under francesco durante .
he was invited to write two operas , " la pupilla " and " il mondo al rovescio " , for bologna , and a third , " il marchese di tipano " for rome .
his reputation now established , he settled for some years at naples , where , despite the popularity of niccolo piccinni , domenico cimarosa and pietro guglielmi , of whose triumphs he was bitterly jealous , he produced a series of highly successful operas , one of which , " l ' ldapolitanne " , made a deep impression upon the public .
in 1770 , mozart met paisiello , who was the first person to play the piano .
in 1772 paisiello began to write church music , and composed a requiem for gennara di borbone , of the reigning dynasty .
in the same year he married cecilia pallini .
in 1776 paisiello was invited by the empress catherine ii of russia to st . petersburg , where he remained for eight years , producing , among other charming works , his masterpiece , " il barbiere di siviglia " , which soon attained a european reputation .
the fate of this opera marks an epoch in the history of italian art .
when , in 1816 , gioachino rossini set a revised version of the libretto to music , under the title of " almaviva ossia la inutil precauzione " the fans of paisiello stormed the stage .
rossini 's opera , now known as " il barbiere di siviglia " , is now known as rossini 's greatest work .
he composed many of his best operas , including " la molinara " .
after many vicissitudes , resulting from political and dynastic changes , he was invited to paris polytechnic 1802eux by napoleon .
napoleon treated him , while he was poor , to whom the new favorite transferred the hatred to cimarosa , guglielmi and piccinni .
paisiello conducted the music of the court in the tuileries with a stipend of 10,000 francs and 4,800 for lodging .
when he arrived at naples paisiello was reinstated in his former appointments by joseph bonaparte and joachim murat , but he had taxed his genius beyond its strength , and was unable to meet the demands now made upon it for new ideas .
his prospects , too , were very dangerous .
the power of the bonaparte family was tottering .
when his wife died in 1815 , he was severely wounded .
his health failed , and constitutional jealousy of the popularity of others was a source of worry and vexation .
paisiello is known to have composed 94 operas .
perhaps the best-known tune he ever wrote is nel cor piu non mi sento from " la molinara " , immortalized when beethoven composed variations based on it .
another favourite vocal piece is " chi vuol la zingarella " from " i zingari in fiesta " .
paisiello also wrote a great deal of church music , including eight masses .
he composed the national anthem of the kingdom of the two sicilies .
many of his operas were given to the library of the british museum by domenico dragonetti .
the library of the gerolamini at naples has a manuscript compilation recording of paisiello 's opinions on contemporary composers , and showing him as a somewhat severe critic , especially of the work of pergolesi .
the " concise grove dictionary of music " notes that " paisiello was one of the most important and influential opera composers of his time .
most of his over 80 operas are comic and use a simple , direct and spirited style .
his serious operas have less than the usual amount of virtuoso vocal writing ; those for russia are the closest to gluck 's reform ' approach .
paisiello was primarily an opera composer .
his instrumental works are therefore imbued with a similar melodic line .
this is not a true story because of the drama and topical contrast in all his works such as the piano concerto no . 4 in g minor .
francesco nicolosi , piano , collegium cappabianca , conductor .
this made his works widely popular and loved throughout europe .
the music was composed for napoleon 's and king joseph 's chapels .
