gershwin studied the piano with charles hambitzer and composition with rubin goldmark , henry cowell , and joseph brody .
he began his career as a song plugger .
he moved to paris to study with nadia boulanger , but she refused him .
he returned to new york city to write his book " porgy and bess " with ira and dubose heyward .
it was a commercial failure but came to be considered one of the most important american operas of the twentieth century .
gershwin moved to hollywood and composed numerous movie scores until his death in 1937 from a malignant brain tumor .
his grandfather , jakov gershowitz , was born in odessa .
moishe gershowitz met roza bruskina , the teenage daughter of a furrier in vilnius .
she moved to new york city to live with her family .
he changed his first name to morris .
she lived with her mother in brooklyn .
he was married to rose gershwine from 1895 until his death in 2006 .
their first child , ira gershwin , was born on december 6,1896 .
he had just one given name , contrary to the american practice of giving children a first and middle name .
he was named after his grandfather , a one-time russian army mechanic .
he changed the spelling of his surname to ' gershwin ' about the time he became a professional musician .
george lived a usual childhood life for children of new york tenements : running around with his boyhood friends , roller skating and misbehaving in the streets .
until 1908 , he cared nothing for music .
george 's parents bought a piano for lessons for his older brother ira , but to his parents ' surprise , and ira 's relief , it was george who spent more time playing it .
although his sister frances was the first in the family to make a living through her musical talents , she married young and devoted herself to being a mother and housewife .
she had given up her performing career .
george gershwin also became composer of songs , musicals , and short piano works .
he encouraged him to attend orchestral concerts .
his employer was jerome h . remick and company , a detroit-based publishing firm with a branch office on new york city 's tin pan alley , and he earned $ 15 a week .
he produced dozens , if not hundreds , of rolls under his own and assumed names gershwin 's attributed names gershwin include fred murtha and bert wynneux .
he also recorded rolls of his own compositions for the duo-art and welte-mignon reproducing pianos .
gershwin made a short foray into vaudeville .
he decided to sing it in one of his shows .
the music was designed by ferde grofe .
in the mid-1920s , gershwin stayed in paris for a short period of time .
it was performed at carnegie hall on december 13,1928 .
in 1929 , the gershwin brothers created " show girl " ; " girl crazy " performed 1930 , which introduced the standards " embraceable you " , debuted by ginger rogers , and " i got rhythm " ; and " of thee i sing " in 1931 , which was the first musical comedy to win the pulitzer prize .
his composition " porgy and bess " was considered a masterpiece by the composer of " rhapsody in blue " .
in 1936 , he was asked by rko pictures to write the music for the movie " shall we dance " .
gershwin 's extended score , which would marry ballet with jazz in a new way , runs over an hour in length .
it took gershwin several months to compose and orchestrate .
gershwin had a ten-year affair with composer kay swift .
she never married .
after gershwin 's death , swift arranged some of his music , transcribed several of his recordings , and collaborated with his brother ira on several projects .
in 1937 , gershwin began to complain of blinding headaches .
he was at the time working on other hollywood movies while living with ira and his wife leonore in their rented house in beverly hills .
she suspected mental illness and insisted he be moved out of their house to lyricist yip harburg 's empty quarters nearby , where he was placed in the care of his valet , paul mueller .
gershwin died on the night of july 9,1937 in harburg 's house .
he was suffering from a brain tumor .
mosbacher immediately called pioneering neurosurgeon harvey cushing in boston , who recommended dr . walter dandy , who was on a boat fishing in chesapeake bay with the governor of maryland .
mosbacher then called the white house and had a coast guard cutter sent to find the governor 's yacht and bring dandy quickly to shore .
by that time , gershwin 's condition was critical and the need for surgery was immediate .
the fact that he had suddenly collapsed and become comatose after he stood up on july 9 , has been interpreted as brain herniation with duret haemorrhages .
a memorial concert was held at the hollywood bowl on september 8,1937 , at which otto klemperer conducted his own orchestration of the second of gershwin 's " three preludes " .
maurice ravel was impressed with gershwin 's abilities , commenting , " personally i find jazz most interesting : the rhythms , the way the melodies are handled , the melodies themselves .
the orchestrations in gershwin 's symphonic works often seem similar to those of ravel .
gershwin 's " concerto in f " was very criticized for being related to the work of claude debussy .
the comparison did not deter him from continuing to explore french styles .
" an american in paris " is about the very journey that he had consciously taken as a composer : " the opening part will be developed in typical french style , in the manner of debussy and les six , though the tunes are original . "
gershwin was intrigued by the works of alban berg , dmitri shostakovich , igor stravinsky , darius milhaud , and arnold schoenberg .
schoenberg said " i would only make you a bad schoenberg , and you 're such a good gershwin already . "
gershwin 's visit to france is very similar to one credited to maurice ravel during gershwin 's visit to france .
ira completely denied that his brother had any such assistance for this work .
gershwin 's third account of gershwin 's musical relationship with his teacher was written by george gershwin 's friend vernon duke , in an article for " the musical quarterly " in 1947 .
the prize is given every year to a composer or performer whose lifetime contributions exemplify the standard of excellence associated with the gershwins .
gershwin made more than one hundred and forty-player piano rolls .
he had more rolls in the 1920s of his main hits for the aeolian company 's reproducing piano , including a complete version of his " rhapsody in blue " .
but the recordings are very popular .
gershwin made a recording of " rhapsody in blue " with paul whiteman and his orchestra for the victor talking machine company in 1924 .
gershwin and the same orchestra made an electrical recording of the abridged version for victor in 1927 .
he made many solo piano recordings of songs from his musicals , including the vocals of fred and adele astaire , as well as his " three preludes " for piano .
in 1929 , gershwin supervised " the world premiere recording of " an american in paris " with nathaniel shilkret and the victor symphony orchestra .
gershwin 's role in the recording was rather limited , particularly because shilkret was conducting and had his own ideas about the music .
when it was realized that no one had been hired to play the brief celeste solo , gershwin was asked if he could and would play the instrument , and he agreed .
gershwin can be heard on the recording during the slow section .
in 1934 , gershwin hosted his own radio program titled " music by gershwin " .
the show was on the nbc blue network from february to may and again in september through the final show on december 23,1934 .
gershwin had parts of the play " porgy and bess " with members of the original cast , conducting the orchestra from the keyboard .
in 1935 rca victor asked him to record some of his last recordings .
a 74-second newsreel movie clip of gershwin playing " i got rhythm " has survived .
there are also silent home movies of gershwin .
in addition , there is footage of gershwin playing " mademoiselle from new rochelle " and " strike up the band " on the piano during a broadway rehearsal of the 1930 production of " strike up the band " .
the comedy team of clark and mccullough are seen conversing with gershwin , then singing as he plays .
in 1965 , movietone records released an album called " george gershwin plays rhapsody in blue and his other favorite compositions " .
the b-side of the columbia masterworks release features tilson thomas leading the new york philharmonic in " an american in paris . "
" rhapsody in blue " was recorded with the paul whiteman orchestra and gershwin on piano ; " an american in paris " , from 1927 with gershwin on celesta ; and " three preludes " , " clap yo ' hands " and someone to watch over me " , among others .
the album has ten songs .
rhapsody in blue was performed in spectacular fashion by many pianists .
the soundtrack to woody allen 's 1979 movie " manhattan " is composed entirely of gershwin 's compositions , including " rhapsody in blue " , " love is sweeping the country " , and " but not for me " , performed by both the new york philharmonic under zubin mehta and the buffalo philharmonic under michael tilson thomas .
the movie begins with a monologue by allen : " he adored new york city . . to him , no matter what the season was , this was still a town that existed in black and white and pulsated to the great tunes of george gershwin . "
in 1993 , two audio cds with piano rolls by gershwin were issued by nonesuch records through the efforts of artis wodehouse , and entitled " " .
in 2009 , brian wilson was completing two unfinished compositions by george gershwin , released as " brian wilson reimagines gershwin " on august 17,2010 .
gershwin wrote original scores for the musicals and orchestral solo piano works .
gershwin died in the early days of his life .
the estate supported the sonny bono copyright term extension act .
the copyrights on all gershwin 's solo works expired at the end of 2007 in the european union , based on its life-plus-70-years rule .
george gershwin was the wealthiest composer of all time .
in september 2013 , a partnership between ira and george gershwin and the university of michigan was created and will provide the university 's school of music , theatre , and dance access to gershwin 's entire body of work , which includes all of gershwin 's papers , drafts , and scores .
this direct access to all of his works will provide opportunities to musicians , composers , and scholars to analyze and reinterpret his work .
they will cover the 1924 jazz band version of " rhapsody in blue " , " an american in paris " and " porgy and bess " .
