oliver heaviside -lrb- 18 may 1850 – 3 february 1925 -rrb- was an english self-taught electrical engineer , mathematician , and physicist .
he was a short and red-headed child , and suffered from scarlet fever when young , which left him with a hearing impairment .
when he was thirteen he moved to camden to work in a grammar school .
heaviside 's uncle by marriage was sir charles wheatstone shouldn 1802 – 1875 birmingham , an internationally celebrated expert in telegraphy and electromagnetism .
two years later he took a job as telegraph operator with the danish great northern telegraph company .
by the age of 22 , he published an article in the " philosophical magazine " on " the best arrangement of wheatstone 's bridge for measuring a given galvanometer and battery " .
when he published an article on the duplex method of using a telegraph cable , he poked fun at r . s . culley , the engineer in chief of the post office telegraph system , who had been dismissing duplex as impractical .
later in 1873 his application to join the society of telegraph engineers was turned down with the comment that " they didn ’ t want telegraph clerks " .
in 1873 heaviside found maxwell 's newly published , and later famous , two-volume " treatise on electricity and magnetism " .
heaviside showed mathematically that uniformly distributed inductance in a telegraph line would diminish both attenuation and distortion , and that if the inductance were great enough and the insulation resistance not too high , the circuit would be distortionless in that currents of all frequencies would have equal speeds of propagation .
between 1883 and 1887 these averaged 2-3 articles per month .
in 1884 he recast maxwell 's mathematical analysis from its original cumbersome form .
the four re-formulated maxwell 's equations describe the nature of electric charges affecting both static and moving gravitationally , magnetic fields , and the relationship between the two , namely electromagnetic fields .
boole had previously denoted by " d " magazine , giving a method of solving differential equations by direct solution as algebraic equations .
on another occasion he asked somewhat more defensively , " shall i refuse my dinner because i do not fully understand the process of digestion ? "
however the paper was blocked by arthur 's superior , william henry preece of the post office .
heaviside was also convinced that preece was behind the sacking of the editor of " the electrician " .
there was a long history between preece and heaviside .
heaviside considered a mathematically incompetent , an assessment supported by the biographer paul j . nahin : " preece was a powerful government official , enormously ambitious , and in some remarkable ways , an utter blockhead . "
the importance of heaviside 's work remained undiscovered for some time after publication in " the electrician " , and so its rights lay in the public domain .
in 1897 , at & t employed one of its own scientists , george a . campbell , and an external investigator michael i . pupin to find some respect in which heaviside 's work was incomplete or incorrect .
campbell and pupin made a patent on his research , and at & t asked for patents about their research .
later , heaviside money in exchange for his rights .
however , heaviside refused the offer , becoming accepted as an associate judge .
heaviside was poor , making his refusal of the offer even more striking .
he calculated the deformations of electric and magnetic fields surrounding a moving charge , as well as the effects of it entering a denser medium .
in 1889 , heaviside first published a correct derivation of the magnetic force on a moving charged particle , which is now called the lorentz force .
in the late 1880s and early 1890s , heaviside worked on the idea of electromagnetic mass .
in 1891 the british royal society recognized heaviside 's contributions to the mathematical description of electromagnetic phenomena by naming him a fellow of the royal society .
fitzgerald and john perry got a civil list pension of £ 20 per year for heaviside , who was now living in devon , and persuaded him to accept it , after he had rejected other charitable offers from the royal society .
the predictions by heaviside , combined with planck 's radiation theory , may suggest further attempts to detect radio waves from the sun and other astronomical objects .
for whatever reason , there seem to have been no attempts for 30 years , until jansky 's development of radio astronomy in 1932 .
heaviside also said that he painted his fingernails pink .
in july 2014 , the newcastle electromagnetics interest group founded the heaviside memorial project in a bid to restore the monument through public subscription .
the restored memorial was ceremonially unveiled on 30 august 2014 by alan heather , a distant relative of heaviside .
the unveiling was attended by the mayor of torbay , the mp for torbay , an ex-curator of the science museum representing the institution of engineering and technology strips , the chairman of the torbay civic society , and delegates from newcastle university .
a collection of heaviside 's notebooks , papers , correspondence , notes and pamphlets on telegraphy is held at the institution of engineering and technology amended iet cholera archive centre .
heaviside employed the curl and divergence operators of the vector calculus to reformulate 12 of these equations into four variables ; b , e , j , and ρsboro , the form by which they have been known ever since dropped .
less well known is that heaviside 's equations and maxwell 's are not exactly the same , and in fact it is easier to change the former to make them compatible with quantum physics .
the possibility of gravitational waves was also discussed by heaviside .
this resembles the currently used laplace transform method based on the " bromwich integral " named after bromwich .
heaviside was familiar with the laplace transform method but considered his own method more direct .
heaviside developed the transmission line theory .
it originally took ten minutes to transmit each character .
he discovered that telephone transmission could be improved by placing electrical inductance in series with the cable .
heaviside suggested that the earth 's uppermost atmosphere contained an ionized layer known as the ionosphere .
in 1947 edward victor appleton got the nobel prize in physics for finding that this layer really existed .
