napalm is a mixture of a gelling agent and a volatile petrochemicalorus usually gasolinehdi gasolineologists .
the name is a combination of the words " co-precipitated aluminium salts " of naphthenic and palmitic acids .
napalm b is the more modern version of napalm .
a team led by louis fieser originally developed napalm for the united states chemical warfare service in 1942 in a secret laboratory at harvard university .
of immediate first interest was that it could be used in fire bombing campaigns during world war ii .
napalm burns at the same temperature as gasoline , and for a greater duration .
it has been used in both the air and ground role .
napalm also has fueled most of the flamethrowers ashore tank , ship and infantry-based couldn used since world war ii .
several countries during the war , including china , russia , iran and north korea , have large stockpiles of napalm-based weapons of various types .
napalm was used in flamethrowers , bombs and tanks in world war ii .
it is believed to have been made to burn at a specific speed and stick to surfaces to increase its stopping power .
it makes carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide .
alternative compositions exist for different uses , e . g . triethylaluminium , a pyrophoric compound that aids ignition .
fire has been used in warfare since the early middle ages .
greek fire , also called " sticky fire " , is believed to have had a petroleum base .
napalm was used by the allied forces during world war ii .
latex , used in these early forms of incendiary devices , became scarce .
this shortage of natural rubber prompted chemists at us companies such as dupont and standard oil , and researchers at harvard university , to develop factory-made alternatives — artificial rubber for all uses , including vehicle tires , tank tracks , gaskets , hoses , medical supplies and rain clothing .
louis fieser at harvard university helped make synthetic napalm .
" the production of napalm was first entrusted to nuodex products , and by the middle of april 1942 they had developed a brown , dry powder that was not sticky by itself , but when mixed with gasoline turned into an extremely sticky and inflammable substance . "
one of fieser 's colleagues suggested adding phosphorus to the mix which increased the " ability to penetrate deeply . . into the musculature , where it would continue to burn day after day . "
the first test took place on july 4,1942 .
tests under operational conditions were carried out at jefferson proving ground on condemned farm buildings .
this new mixture of chemicals was widely used in the second world war in incendiary bombs and flamethrowers .
from 1965 to 1969 , the dow chemical company manufactured napalm b for the american armed forces .
dow chemical experienced boycotts of its products , and its recruiters for new chemists , chemical engineers , etc . , graduating from college were subject to campus boycotts and protests .
the management of the company decided that its " first obligation was the government . "
meanwhile , napalm b became a symbol for the vietnam war .
napalm was first used in incendiary bombs .
the first recorded strategic use of napalm incendiary bombs occurred in an attack by the us army air force on march 6,1944 , using american an-m76 incendiary bombs with pt-1 foley filler .
the first known tactical use by the usaaf was by the 368th fighter group , 9th air force northeast of compeigne , france 27 may 1944 .
soldiers of this waffen ss unit had captured and killed a british sas prisoner-of-war , lt . tomos stephens , taking part in operation bulbasket , and seven local resistance fighters .
the sas unit was not known at the time of the air strike .
in 1944 and 1945 , napalm was used as a tactical weapon against japanese bunkers , pillboxes , tunnels , and other fortifications .
napalm bombs were used by aviators of the u . s . navy , the united states army air forces , and the u . s . marine corps .
then , when the u . s . army air forces on the marianas islands ran out of conventional thermite incendiary bombs for their b-29 superfortresses to drop on japanese cities , its top commanders , such as general curtis lemay , used napalm bombs to continue fire on the large japanese cities .
in the european theater of operations napalm was used by american forces in the siege of la rochelle in april 1945 .
napalm was also used by the united states during the korean war .
these ground forces in north korea were outnumbered at points of defense by chinese and north koreans , but u . s . air force and navy pilots had control of the air over nearly all of the korean peninsula .
because of this , close air support of the ground troops along the border between north korea and south korea was vital , and the american and other u . n . aviators used napalm b for attacks in north korea .
napalm was used during the battle " outpost harry " in south korea during the night of june 10 – 11,1953 .
eighth army chemical officer donald bode reported that on an " average good day " un pilots used 70,000 gallons of napalm , with approximately 60,000 gallons of this thrown by us forces .
in john ford 's 1951 documentary , " this is korea " , footage of napalm deployment is accompanied by a voice-over by john wayne saying , " burn ' em out , cook ' em , fry ' em " ; the " new york herald tribune " hailed napalm , the no . 1 weapon in korea .
winston churchill , among others , criticized american use of napalm in korea , calling it " very cruel " , as the us / un forces , he said , were " splashing it all over the civilian population " , " torturing great masses of people " .
the american official who took this statement declined to publicize it .
napalm became an important part of the u . s . military action during the vietnam war .
the bomb was dropped in three years in the korean war .
napalm was used by the u . s . air force and u . s . navy against all kinds of targets .
napalm had psychological effects on the enemy as well .
a variant of napalm was made in rhodesia for a type of ordnance known as " frantan " between 1968 and 1978 .
in may 1978 , herbert ushewokunze , minister of health for the zimbabwe african national unionographership produced photographic evidence of purported civilian victims of rhodesian napalm .
the government of mozambique and the zimbabwe african people 's union madhya zapu foley also said that napalm strikes against guerrilla targets had become a common feature in rhodesian military operations both at home and abroad .
the south african air force frequently deployed napalm from atlas impala strike aircraft during raids on guerrilla bases in angola during the south african border war .
other instances of napalm 's use include by france during the first indochina war — 1946 – 1954 indochina war — 1954 indochina war — the algerian war shouldn 1954 – 1962 1962 indochina war — the portuguese colonial war — 1961 – 1974 foley ; the six-day war by israel ; india and pakistan ; india ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ;
recently , turkey has been accused of using napalm in its war against kurdish militias over afrin .
turkey ’ s general staff , however , denies this .
napalm can cause severe burns ; it can cause severe burns ; asphyxiation , unconsciousness , and death .
napalm fires can create an atmosphere of greater than 20 % carbon monoxide and firestorms with self-perpetuating winds of up to 70 mph .
napalm is effective against enemy soldiers .
the burning incendiary composition flows into foxholes , trenches and bunkers , and drainage and irrigation ditches and other improvised troop shelters .
even people in undamaged shelters can be killed by hyperthermia , radiant heat , dehydration , smoke exposure , or carbon monoxide poisoning .
one firebomb released from a low-flying plane can damage an area of 2,000 sqyd .
international law does not prohibit the use of napalm or other incendiaries against military targets .
protocol iii of the ccw restricts the use of incendiary weapons , but a number of countries have not acceded to all of the protocols of the ccw .
countries are considered a party to the convention .
the united states signed the treaty of 2009 .
it says that the treaty can be ignored if it would save civilian lives .
