people with the symptoms may get headache , fever , confusion , a stiff neck , and vomiting .
problems with hearing , seizures , hallucinations , trouble speaking , memory problems , and problems with hearing .
encephalitis include viruses such as herpes simplex virus and rabies as well as bacteria , fungi , or parasites .
once the immediate problem is under control , rehabilitation may be required .
adults with encephalitis have fever , headache , confusion , and sometimes seizures .
younger children or infants may have irritable , poor appetite and fever .
stiff neck is a sign that the person has either meningitis or meningoencephalitis .
viral encephalitis can occur either as a direct effect of an acute infection , or as one of the sequelae of a latent infection .
the most common cause of viral encephalitis is viral encephalitis .
the powassan virus is a rare cause of encephalitis .
some parasitic or protozoal infestations , such as toxoplasmosis , malaria , or primary amoebic meningoencephalitis , can also cause encephalitis in people with compromised immune systems .
other bacterial pathogens , like " mycoplasma " and those causing rickettsial disease , cause inflammation of the meninges and consequently encephalitis .
limbic encephalitis refers to inflammatory disease confined to the brain .
the clinical presentation may include disorientation , disinhibition , memory loss , seizures , and behavioral anomalies .
mri imaging has t2 hyperintensity in the structures of the medial temporal lobes , and in some cases , other limbic structures .
some cases of limbic encephalitis are of autoimmune origin .
anti-nmda receptor encephalitis is the most common autoimmune form .
encephalitis lethargica is identified by high fever , headache , delayed physical response , and lethargy .
people can have upper body weakness , muscular pains , and tremors .
people should only be diagnosed with encephalitis if they have a decreased or altered level of consciousness , lethargy , or personality change for at least twenty-four hours without any other explanationable cause .
if a person has a contraindication , it should be observed in people with encephalitis .
pyrimethamine-based maintenance therapy is often used to treat toxoplasmic encephalitisily tectum .
this is a significant difference as relapse may impact the severity and prognosis of disease and result in an increase in healthcare expenditure .
some people identify poor prognostic factors as well as status epilepticus , and thrombocytopenia .
the number of new cases a year of acute encephalitis in western countries is 7.4 cases per 100,000 people per year .
in tropical countries , the number of people in the country is 6.34 per 100,000 people per year .
the number of cases of encephalitis has not changed a year , with about 250,000 cases a year from 2005 to 2015 .
seven people were hospitalized for encephalitis in the united states during this time .
herpes simplex encephalitis has an incidence of 2-4 million of the population per year .