encephalitis is inflammation of the brain .
people with the symptoms may get headache , fever , confusion , a stiff neck , and vomiting .
problems with hearing , seizures , hallucinations , trouble speaking , memory problems , and problems with hearing .
encephalitis include viruses such as herpes simplex virus and rabies as well as bacteria , fungi , or parasites .
some people also cause autoimmune diseases .
in many cases the cause is unknown .
risk factors include a weak immune system .
the diagnosis is usually based on blood tests , medical imaging , and analysis of cerebrospinal fluid .
vaccines can prevent certain types of vaccines .
treatment may include antiviral medicationsdington , anticonvulsants , and corticosteroids .
treatment generally takes place in hospital .
some people need to live without respiration .
once the immediate problem is under control , rehabilitation may be required .
in 2015 , encephalitis was estimated to have affected 4.3 million people and resulted in 150,000 deaths worldwide .
adults with encephalitis have fever , headache , confusion , and sometimes seizures .
younger children or infants may have irritable , poor appetite and fever .
neurological examinations usually show a drowsy person .
stiff neck is a sign that the person has either meningitis or meningoencephalitis .
viral encephalitis can occur either as a direct effect of an acute infection , or as one of the sequelae of a latent infection .
the most common cause of viral encephalitis is viral encephalitis .
other causes of acute viral encephalitis are rabies virus , poliovirus , and measles virus .
additional possible viral causes are arboviral flavivirusization st . louis encephalitis , west nile virusitung virus xvi , bunyavirusvirusegalitis , arenavirusostomaomaomaomaomaomaomaomaomaomaomaomaomaomaomaomaomaomaomaomaomaomaomaomaomaomaomaomacy , reovirus guangdong virus infection , reovirusirusirusirus guangdong virus virus virus virus infection , and henipavirus infections .
the powassan virus is a rare cause of encephalitis .
it can be caused by a bacterial infection , such as bacterial meningitis .
some parasitic or protozoal infestations , such as toxoplasmosis , malaria , or primary amoebic meningoencephalitis , can also cause encephalitis in people with compromised immune systems .
lyme disease or " bartonella henselae " may also cause encephalitis .
other bacterial pathogens , like " mycoplasma " and those causing rickettsial disease , cause inflammation of the meninges and consequently encephalitis .
non-infectious causes include acute disseminated encephalitis which is demyelinated .
limbic encephalitis refers to inflammatory disease confined to the brain .
the clinical presentation may include disorientation , disinhibition , memory loss , seizures , and behavioral anomalies .
mri imaging has t2 hyperintensity in the structures of the medial temporal lobes , and in some cases , other limbic structures .
some cases of limbic encephalitis are of autoimmune origin .
autoimmune encephalitis can include catatonia , psychosis , abnormal movements , and autonomic dysregulation .
antibody-mediated anti-n-methyl-d-aspartate-receptor encephalitis and rasmussen encephalitis are examples of autoimmune encephalitis .
anti-nmda receptor encephalitis is the most common autoimmune form .
encephalitis lethargica is identified by high fever , headache , delayed physical response , and lethargy .
people can have upper body weakness , muscular pains , and tremors .
from 1917 to 1928 , there was an epidemic of encephalitis lethargica .
people should only be diagnosed with encephalitis if they have a decreased or altered level of consciousness , lethargy , or personality change for at least twenty-four hours without any other explanationable cause .
vaccination is available against tick-borne and japanese encephalitis .
post-infectious encephalomyelitis complicating smallpox vaccination is notable , for all intents and purposes , as smallpox is nearly eradicated .
if a person has a contraindication , it should be observed in people with encephalitis .
pyrimethamine-based maintenance therapy is often used to treat toxoplasmic encephalitisily tectum .
the use of highly active antiretroviral therapy prohibits the risk of getting better in patients with hiv and te from about 18 % to 11 % .
this is a significant difference as relapse may impact the severity and prognosis of disease and result in an increase in healthcare expenditure .
some people identify poor prognostic factors as well as status epilepticus , and thrombocytopenia .
a normal encephalogram at the early stages of diagnosis is associated with high rates of survival .
the number of new cases a year of acute encephalitis in western countries is 7.4 cases per 100,000 people per year .
in tropical countries , the number of people in the country is 6.34 per 100,000 people per year .
the number of cases of encephalitis has not changed a year , with about 250,000 cases a year from 2005 to 2015 .
seven people were hospitalized for encephalitis in the united states during this time .
in 2015 , encephalitis was estimated to have affected 4.3 million people and resulted in 150,000 deaths worldwide .
herpes simplex encephalitis has an incidence of 2-4 million of the population per year .
encephalitis with meningitis is known as meningoencephalitis .
the word is from ancient greek εγεφαλος , " enkephalos " brain " , composed of εν , " en " , " en " , " in " and κεφαλη , " kephale " , " head " , and the medical suffix "-itis " inflammation " .
