pokemon is a media franchise managed by the pokemon company .
the franchise is shared by all three companies , but nintendo is the sole owner of the trademark .
the series is centered around fictional creatures called " poke poke " .
the english slogan for the franchise is " gotta catch ' em all " .
the games are set in the pokemon universe .
the first game series was released in japan as " poke mon yellow " and " blue " .
it soon became a media mix franchise adapted into various media .
" pokemon " has since gone on to become the highest-grossing media franchise of all time , with $ in total franchise revenue .
the first video game series is the second best-selling video game franchise behind nintendo 's " mario " franchiseoop down to 340 million copies sold and 1billion mobile downloads .
the " poke mon " franchise includes the world 's top-selling toy brand , the top-selling trading card game with over 27.2billion cards sold , an anime movie series , a live-action film , books , manga comics , music , merchandise , and a theme park .
the series is represented in other nintendo media , such as the " super smash bros . " series .
in november 2005,4kids entertainment , which had managed the licensing of " poke mon " , announced that it had agreed not to renew the " pokemon " representation agreement .
the company international oversees all pokemon licensing outside asia .
the franchise celebrated in 2006 .
in 2016 , pokemon company celebrated " poke mon " 's 20th anniversary by airing an ad during super bowl 50 in january .
the virtual mobile augmented reality game " poke mon go " was released in july 2016 .
the most recent games in the main series , were released worldwide on the nintendo switch on november 16,2018 .
the first live-action movie in the franchise , " pokemon detective pikachu " , is based on " detective pikachu " , will be released in 2019 .
the upcoming and latest games in the main series , " pokemon sword and shield " , are scheduled to be released worldwide on the nintendo switch on november 15,2019 .
pokemon is a portmanteau of the japanese brand " pocket monsters " .
the name " pokemon " , also refers to the " poke " franchise which were first used in " poke poke poke " media .
poke mon first thought of " poke poke mon " , but with a different concept and name , around 1989 , when the game boy was released .
the idea of the poke mon in both the video games and the general fictional world of " poke " , stems from the hobby of insect collecting , a popular pastime which tajiri enjoyed as a child .
players are designated as poke trainers and have three general goals : to complete the regional pokedex by collecting all of the available poke species found in the region where a game takes place , to complete the poke pokes by transferring pokes from other regions , and to train a team of powerful pokes from those they have caught to compete against teams that have become the league champion .
these themes of collecting , training , and battling are present in almost every version of the poke mon franchise .
in most forms of the poke mon , a trainer who encounters a poke poke poke poke poke poke poke mon can capture that poke ball by throwing a specially designed , mass-producible spherical tool called a poke ball at it .
if the pokemon is unable to escape the poke ball , it is considered to be under the ownership of that trainer .
afterwards , it will obey whatever commands it receives from its new trainer , unless the trainer demonstrates such a lack of experience that the pokemon would rather act on its own accord .
trainers can send out any of their poke mon to fight against other poke mon .
in " poke go " , pokemon go and pikachu !
and " let 's go , eevee ! "
poke poke poke poke pokes can be seen in poke balls .
poke monia are already owned by other trainers .
if a pokemon fully defeats an opponent in battle , the winner gains experience points and may level up .
beginning with " poke poke poke mon " and " y " , poke poke poke pokes can be caught by poke balls .
when leveling up , the pokemon 's battling aptitude statisticsyst , such as " attack " and " speed " creates a higher level .
at some levels , the pokemon may also learn new moves , which are techniques used in battle .
in addition , many species can undergo a form of metamorphosis and transform into a similar but stronger species of poke mon , a process called evolution .
some species may undergo a maximum of two evolutionary transformations , while others may undergo only one , and others may not evolve at all .
for example , pokemon pichu may evolve into pikachu , which in turn may evolve into raichu , following which no further evolutions may occur .
" poke x " and " y " introduced the concept of " mega evolution " .
in the main series , each game requires the trainer to raise a team of poke mon .
each game lays out a path through a region of the " poke " world for the trainer to journey through .
the games feature eight powerful trainers , referred to as gym leaders , that the trainer must defeat in order to progress .
as a reward , the trainer receives a gym badge , and once all eight badges are collected , the trainer is allowed to challenge the region 's poke poke poke league .
if the trainer can overcome this gauntlet , they must challenge the regional champion , the master trainer who had previously defeated the elite four .
any trainer who wins this last battle becomes the new champion .
all of the licensed " pokemon " properties overseen by the pokemon company international are divided by generation .
the sequel is considered the start of a new generation of the franchise .
the main " poke mon " video games and spin-offs , the anime , manga , and trading card game are all updated with the new poke properties each time a new generation begins .
some poke mon from the newer games appear in anime games or films months , or even years before the game they were programmed for came out .
the first generation of the game boy was called " pokemon red " and " green " .
the series was released on november 18,2016 .
the most recent games in the main series , were released on the nintendo switch on november 16,2018 .
" pokemon sword " and " shield " will begin the eighth generation on the nintendo switch and will be released in late 2019 .
pokemon is an anime series based on the " poke mon " series .
it was first broadcast on tv tokyo in 1997 .
as of 2018 , it has produced and aired over 1,000 episodes , divided into 6 series in japan and 22 seasons internationally .
the anime follows the quest of the main character , ash ketchumference known as satoshi in japan c1 , as he and a small group of friends travel around the world of poke mon with their friends .
various children 's books , collectively known as " pokemon junior " , are also based on the anime .
in addition to the tv series , 22 animated " poke mon " movies have been directed by kunihiko yuyama and tetsuo yajima .
the two movies together make one movie .
collectibles , such as promotional trading cards , have been available with some of the movies .
a live-action " pokemon " movie directed by rob letterman , produced by legendary entertainment , and distributed in japan by warner bros .
on august 24 , the movie 's official title was announced as " pokemon detective pikachu " .
it was released on may 10,2019 .
" pokemon " was released in north america on may 27,2005 .
these releases were commonplace until late 2001 .
on march 27,2007 , a tenth anniversary cd was released .
the movie soundtracks of the " poke mon " feature movies have been released in japan each year in conjunction with the theatrical releases .
in 2017 , a soundtrack album featuring music from the north american versions of the 17th through 20th movies was released .
the pokemon trading card game is a collectable card game with a goal similar to a poke poke mon battle .
players use poke cards to battle their opponent by " knocking out " their poke cards .
it was published in 1999 .
with the release of the game boy advance video games " poke mon " and " sapphire " , the pokemon company took back the card game from wizards of the coast and started publishing the cards themselves .
the expedition expansion introduced the " poke-e trading card game " , where the cards exchanged for the most part dalai partials were compatible with the nintendo e-reader .
nintendo discontinued its production of e-reader compatible cards with the release of " firered " and " leafgreen " .
in 1998 , nintendo released a trading card game in japan .
the first two expansions included jungle and fossilocation , as well as several cards exclusive to the game .
a sequel was released in 2001 .
there are several pokemon manga series .
the manga series varies from game-based series to being based on the anime and the trading card game .
original stories have also been published .
as there are several series created by different authors , most " poke mon " manga series differ greatly from each other and other media , such as the anime .
" poke mon " and " pokemon " are two manga series of games made by nintendo .
a " pokemon "-styled " monopoly " board game was released in august 2014 .
some people think that " poke poke poke mon " and " poke mon " are the reason why poke mon are made .
sat2000 , a satellite television station based in vatican city , has countered that the pokemon trading card game and video games are " full of inventive imagination " and have no " harmful moral side effects " .
david tate said , " some people aren ' t happy with pokemon and want an alternative , others just want christian games . "
the game was similar to the pokemon trading card game but used biblical figures .
in 1999 , nintendo stopped making the japanese version of the " koga 's ninja trick " trading card .
the jewish civil rights group anti-defamation league complained that the symbol is the reverse of a swastika , a nazi symbol .
the cards were originally intended for sale in japan but the popularity of " poke mon " led to import into the united states with approval from nintendo .
the anti-defamation league knew that the issue symbol was not intended to offend and acknowledged the sensitivity that nintendo showed by removing the product .
in 1999 , two boys from merrick , new york sued nintendo for gambling .
in 2001 , saudi arabia banned " pokemon " games and the trading cards .
" poke mon " has also been accused of promoting materialism .
in 2012 , peta said that " poke poke mon " should be like cruelty to animals .
peta compared the game 's concept , of capturing animals and forcing them to fight , to cockfights , dog fighting rings and circuses , events frequently criticized for cruelty to animals .
peta released a spoofing poke mon which is where the pokemon battle their trainers to win their freedom .
peta reaffirmed their objections in 2016 with the release of " poke go " , promoting the hashtag # gottafreethemall .
in december 1997 , more than 635 japanese children were admitted to hospitals with epileptic seizures .
as a result , this episode has not been aired since .
in this episode , there were bright explosions with rapidly alternating blue and red colour patterns .
later research showed that these strobing light effects cause some individuals to have epileptic seizures .
this incident is a common focus of poke mon in other media .
in march 2000 , morrison entertainment group , a toy developer based at manhattan beach , california , sued nintendo over claims that " pokemon " infringed on its own " monster in my pocket " characters .
a judge ruled there was no infringement .
on february 4,2003 , the u . s . court of appeals for the ninth circuit upheld the decision by the district court to dismiss the suit .
within its first two days of release , pokemon go raised safety concerns among players .
several people also suffered minor injuries from falling while playing the game due to being distracted .
many police departments in various countries have issued warnings , some tongue-in-cheek , regarding inattentive driving , trespassing , and being targeted by criminals due to being unaware of one 's surroundings .
bosnian players have been warned to stay out of minefields left over from the bosnian war .
on july 20,2016 , it was reported that an 18-year-old boy in chiquimula , guatemala was shot and killed while playing the game in the late evening hours .
this was the first reported death in connection with the app .
the boy 's 17-year-old cousin was shot in the foot .
police think that the shooters used the game 's gps capability to find the two .
" pokemon " is a very popular franchise .
the " pokemon " characters have become pop culture icons .
pokemon was also on the cover of the u . s . magazine time in 1999 .
the comedy central show " drawn together " has a character named ling-ling who is a parody of pikachu .
some of the shows such as " the simpsons " , " robot chicken " and " robot chicken " have made references and spoofs of " poke mon " , among other series .
pokemon was featured on vh1 's " poke mon " .
a live action show based on the anime called " poke live ! "
toured the united states in late 2000 .
jim butcher said " pokemon " was one of the inspirations for the " codex alera " series of novels .
poke mon have even made its mark in the realm of science .
this includes animals named after pokemon , such as stentorceps weedlei faerie named after the pokemon weedle curiously and aerodactylus scolopacicepstead named after the pokemon aerodactyl .
there is also a protein named after pikachu , called pikachurin .
in november 2001 , nintendo opened a store called the pokemon center in new york , in rockefeller center .
poke mon poke poke mon centers are fictional buildings where trainers take their injured pokemon to be healed after combat .
the store sold pokemon merchandise on a total of two floors .
the store also featured a pokemon distributing machine in which players would place their game to receive an egg of a pokemon that was being given out at that time .
the store also had tables that were open for players of the pokemon trading card game to duel each other or an employee .
the store was closed and replaced by the nintendo world store on may 14,2005 .
four pokemon center kiosks were shopping malls in the seattle area .
the first online store was released on august 6,2014 .
professor of education joseph tobin theorizes that the success of the franchise was due to the long list of names that could be learned by children and repeated in their peer groups .
its rich fictional universe gives opportunities for discussion and demonstration of knowledge in front of their peers .
the names of the creatures were linked to its characteristics , which converged with the children 's belief that names have symbolic power .
they can tell their own way of saying what they liked and what they did not like from every chapter .
" pokemon " gained popularity because it gives a sense of identity to a wide variety of children , and lost it quickly when many of those children found that the identity groups were too big and searched for identities that would distinguish them into smaller groups .
" poke mon " 's history has been marked at times by rivalry with the " digimon " media franchise that debuted at a similar time .
ign 's juan castro said " digimon " was " the other ' mon ' " .
ign 's lucas m . thomas said that " poke poke poke mon " is " digimon " 's " constant competition and comparison " , attributing the former 's relative success to the simplicity of its evolution mechanic as opposed to digivolution .
the two have been noted for conceptual and stylistic similarities by sources such as gamezone .
there is debate about which of the two teams came first .
the " poke mon " virtual pet was released on june 26,1997 .
while " poke " 's target demographic is children , early purchasers of " poke omega ruby " and " alpha sapphire " were in their 20s .
many fans are adults who play the games as children and have returned to the series .
bulbapedia is a wiki-based online encyclopedia with long-time fan site bulbagarden .
jonathan zarra created the site based chat app gochat for " poke mon " .
another popular poke mon news website is serebii , created by joe merrick in october 1999 .
a significant community around the " poke " video games ' metagame has existed for a long time .
the most prolific competitive community is smogon university , which has created a widely accepted tier-based battle system .
smogon is connected with an online " pokemon " game called " pokemon showdown " .
in early 2014 , an anonymous video streamer on twitch launched twitch plays " poke mon " .
a new challenge called the " nuzlocke challenge " was created in order for older players of the series to enjoy " poke mon " again , but with a twist .
the player is only allowed to capture the first poke poke poke poke poke mon seen in each area .
if they do not capture that poke mon , there are no second chances .
when a pokemon faints it is considered " dead " and must be released or stored in the pc permanently .
if the player faints , the game is over , and the player must restart .
the first idea was to rule the community .
there are many fan-made " poke mon " games that contain a game mode similar to the nuzlocke challenge , such as " pokemon uranium " .
a study at stanford neurosciences published in " nature " performed magnetic resonance imaging scans of 11 poke experts and 11 controls .
