the franchise is shared by all three companies , but nintendo is the sole owner of the trademark .
the first game series was released in japan as " poke mon yellow " and " blue " .
it soon became a media mix franchise adapted into various media .
"
pokemon " has since gone on to become the highest-grossing media franchise of all time , with $ in total franchise revenue .
the first video game series is the second best-selling video game franchise behind nintendo 's " mario " franchiseoop down to 340 million copies sold and 1billion mobile downloads .
the " poke mon " franchise includes the world 's top-selling toy brand , the top-selling trading card game with over 27.2billion cards sold , an anime movie series , a live-action film , books , manga comics , music , merchandise , and a theme park .
the series is represented in other nintendo media , such as the " super smash bros . " series .
in november 2005,4kids entertainment , which had managed the licensing of " poke mon " , announced that it had agreed not to renew the " pokemon " representation agreement .
the virtual mobile augmented reality game " poke mon go " was released in july 2016 .
the most recent games in the main series , were released worldwide on the nintendo switch on november 16,2018 .
the first live-action movie in the franchise , " pokemon detective pikachu " , is based on " detective pikachu " , will be released in 2019 .
the upcoming and latest games in the main series , " pokemon sword and shield " , are scheduled to be released worldwide on the nintendo switch on november 15,2019 .
pokemon is a portmanteau of the japanese brand " pocket monsters " .
the name " pokemon " , also refers to the " poke " franchise which were first used in " poke poke poke " media .
poke mon first thought of " poke poke mon " , but with a different concept and name , around 1989 , when the game boy was released .
the idea of the poke mon in both the video games and the general fictional world of " poke " , stems from the hobby of insect collecting , a popular pastime which tajiri enjoyed as a child .
players are designated as poke trainers and have three general goals : to complete the regional pokedex by collecting all of the available poke species found in the region where a game takes place , to complete the poke pokes by transferring pokes from other regions , and to train a team of powerful pokes from those they have caught to compete against teams that have become the league champion .
these themes of collecting , training , and battling are present in almost every version of the poke mon franchise .
if the pokemon is unable to escape the poke ball , it is considered to be under the ownership of that trainer .
afterwards , it will obey whatever commands it receives from its new trainer , unless the trainer demonstrates such a lack of experience that the pokemon would rather act on its own accord .
trainers can send out any of their poke mon to fight against other poke mon .
when leveling up , the pokemon 's battling aptitude statisticsyst , such as " attack " and " speed " creates a higher level .
at some levels , the pokemon may also learn new moves , which are techniques used in battle .
in addition , many species can undergo a form of metamorphosis and transform into a similar but stronger species of poke mon , a process called evolution .
some species may undergo a maximum of two evolutionary transformations , while others may undergo only one , and others may not evolve at all .
in the main series , each game requires the trainer to raise a team of poke mon .
as a reward , the trainer receives a gym badge , and once all eight badges are collected , the trainer is allowed to challenge the region 's poke poke poke league .
if the trainer can overcome this gauntlet , they must challenge the regional champion , the master trainer who had previously defeated the elite four .
the sequel is considered the start of a new generation of the franchise .
the main " poke mon " video games and spin-offs , the anime , manga , and trading card game are all updated with the new poke properties each time a new generation begins .
some poke mon from the newer games appear in anime games or films months , or even years before the game they were programmed for came out .
the first generation of the game boy was called " pokemon red " and " green " .
pokemon sword " and " shield " will begin the eighth generation on the nintendo switch and will be released in late 2019 .
pokemon is an anime series based on the " poke mon " series .
the anime follows the quest of the main character , ash ketchumference known as satoshi in japan c1 , as he and a small group of friends travel around the world of poke mon with their friends .
various children 's books , collectively known as " pokemon junior " , are also based on the anime .
in addition to the tv series , 22 animated " poke mon " movies have been directed by kunihiko yuyama and tetsuo yajima .
a live-action " pokemon " movie directed by rob letterman , produced by legendary entertainment , and distributed in japan by warner bros .
on august 24 , the movie 's official title was announced as " pokemon detective pikachu " .
the movie soundtracks of the " poke mon " feature movies have been released in japan each year in conjunction with the theatrical releases .
players use poke cards to battle their opponent by " knocking out " their poke cards .
it was published in 1999 .
with the release of the game boy advance video games " poke mon " and " sapphire " , the pokemon company took back the card game from wizards of the coast and started publishing the cards themselves .
the expedition expansion introduced the " poke-e trading card game " , where the cards exchanged for the most part dalai partials were compatible with the nintendo e-reader .
nintendo discontinued its production of e-reader compatible cards with the release of " firered " and " leafgreen " .
as there are several series created by different authors , most " poke mon " manga series differ greatly from each other and other media , such as the anime .
"
sat2000 , a satellite television station based in vatican city , has countered that the pokemon trading card game and video games are " full of inventive imagination " and have no " harmful moral side effects " .
david tate said , " some people aren ' t happy with pokemon and want an alternative , others just want christian games . "
the jewish civil rights group anti-defamation league complained that the symbol is the reverse of a swastika , a nazi symbol .
the cards were originally intended for sale in japan but the popularity of " poke mon " led to import into the united states with approval from nintendo .
poke mon " has also been accused of promoting materialism .
peta released a spoofing poke mon which is where the pokemon battle their trainers to win their freedom .
as a result , this episode has not been aired since .
in march 2000 , morrison entertainment group , a toy developer based at manhattan beach , california , sued nintendo over claims that " pokemon " infringed on its own " monster in my pocket " characters .
within its first two days of release , pokemon go raised safety concerns among players .
bosnian players have been warned to stay out of minefields left over from the bosnian war .
pokemon was also on the cover of the u . s . magazine time in 1999 .
the comedy central show " drawn together " has a character named ling-ling who is a parody of pikachu .
some of the shows such as " the simpsons " , " robot chicken " and " robot chicken " have made references and spoofs of " poke mon " , among other series .
toured the united states in late 2000 .
jim butcher said " pokemon " was one of the inspirations for the " codex alera " series of novels .
poke mon have even made its mark in the realm of science .
there is also a protein named after pikachu , called pikachurin .
poke mon poke poke mon centers are fictional buildings where trainers take their injured pokemon to be healed after combat .
the store sold pokemon merchandise on a total of two floors .
the store also featured a pokemon distributing machine in which players would place their game to receive an egg of a pokemon that was being given out at that time .
the store also had tables that were open for players of the pokemon trading card game to duel each other or an employee .
the store was closed and replaced by the nintendo world store on may 14,2005 .
four pokemon center kiosks were shopping malls in the seattle area .
the first online store was released on august 6,2014 .
professor of education joseph tobin theorizes that the success of the franchise was due to the long list of names that could be learned by children and repeated in their peer groups .
they can tell their own way of saying what they liked and what they did not like from every chapter .
"
pokemon " gained popularity because it gives a sense of identity to a wide variety of children , and lost it quickly when many of those children found that the identity groups were too big and searched for identities that would distinguish them into smaller groups .
"
poke mon " 's history has been marked at times by rivalry with the " digimon " media franchise that debuted at a similar time .
the two have been noted for conceptual and stylistic similarities by sources such as gamezone .
the " poke mon " virtual pet was released on june 26,1997 .
while " poke " 's target demographic is children , early purchasers of " poke omega ruby " and " alpha sapphire " were in their 20s .
many fans are adults who play the games as children and have returned to the series .
another popular poke mon news website is serebii , created by joe merrick in october 1999 .
a significant community around the " poke " video games ' metagame has existed for a long time .
in early 2014 , an anonymous video streamer on twitch launched twitch plays " poke mon " .
a new challenge called the " nuzlocke challenge " was created in order for older players of the series to enjoy " poke mon " again , but with a twist .
if they do not capture that poke mon , there are no second chances .
when a pokemon faints it is considered " dead " and must be released or stored in the pc permanently .
if the player faints , the game is over , and the player must restart .
there are many fan-made " poke mon " games that contain a game mode similar to the nuzlocke challenge , such as " pokemon uranium " .