a sign is an object , quality , event , or thing whose presence or occurrence indicates the probable presence or occurrence of something else .
semiotics , epistemology , logic , and philosophy of language are about the nature of signs , what they are and how they signify .
the nature of signs and symbols and significations , their definition , elements , and types , is mainly established by aristotle , augustine , and aquinas .
according to these classic sources , significance is a relationship between two sorts of things : signs and the kinds of things they signifyifysee intend , express or meanchang , where one term necessarily causes something else to come to the mind .
there are signs which are " always " signs ; thoughts and feelings , constructs and signs that get their cultural signs and signs .
human language and discourse , communication , science , logic , mathematics , theology , and religion are only some of the fields of human study .
st . augustine was the first man who made the classical and hellenistic theories of signs .
for him a sign is a thing which is used to signify other things and to make them come to mindocation " de doctrina christiana " whenever hereafter ddc explains 1.2 ; 2.1 .
although god does not mention the bible , augustine gave emphasis to the possibility of god ’ s communication with humans by signs in scripture adorned ddc 1.6 ounces .
among the mainstream in the theories of signs , i . e . , that of aristotle and that of stoics , the former theory filtered into the works of cicero cicero cicero juveniles , " de inventione rhetorica " 1.30 .
in his commentary on aristotle 's " de interpretatione " , ammonius said , " according to the division of the philosopher theophrastus , the relation of speech is twofold , first in regard to the audience , to which speech signifies something , and secondly in regard to the things about which the speaker intends to persuade the audience . "
augustine , although influenced by these theories , advanced his theological theory of signs , with whose help one can infer the mind of god from the events and words of scripture .
the ddc explains all kinds of signs and explains how to interpret them .
the order of readingicative " lectio " is based on textual criticism ; " emendatio " ; and " enarratio " means the hebrew language .
the interpreter must have a spirit of active inquiry and should not hesitate to learn and use pagan education for the purpose of leading to christian learning .
third , the heart of interpreter should be founded , rooted , and built up in love .
even if the scriptural text is obscure , it has meaningful benefits .
for the obscure text prevents us from falling into pride , triggers our intelligencembit 2.6 .
12 alternatively , and refines our mind to be suitable to the holy mysteriesctor .
when interpreting signs , the literal meaning should first be sought .
moreover , he introduces the seven rules of tyconius the donatist to interpret the obscure meaning of the bible .
every part of theology must be involved and interdisciplinary approaches must be taken .