a sign is an object , quality , event , or thing whose presence or occurrence indicates the probable presence or occurrence of something else .
a natural sign bears a causal relation to its object .
a conventional sign signifies by agreement , as a full stop signifies the end of a sentence .
signstorm notices , road signs , etc . , collectively known as signage signage signage signage signage signagefully inform or instruct using written text , symbols , pictures or a combination of these .
the philosophical study of signs and symbols is called semiotics .
semiotics , epistemology , logic , and philosophy of language are about the nature of signs , what they are and how they signify .
the nature of signs and symbols and significations , their definition , elements , and types , is mainly established by aristotle , augustine , and aquinas .
according to these classic sources , significance is a relationship between two sorts of things : signs and the kinds of things they signifyifysee intend , express or meanchang , where one term necessarily causes something else to come to the mind .
there are signs which are " always " signs ; thoughts and feelings , constructs and signs that get their cultural signs and signs .
natural signs are the source of signification .
human language and discourse , communication , science , logic , mathematics , theology , and religion are only some of the fields of human study .
they communicate / pass across / messages to the human mind through their pictorial representation .
st . augustine was the first man who made the classical and hellenistic theories of signs .
for him a sign is a thing which is used to signify other things and to make them come to mindocation " de doctrina christiana " whenever hereafter ddc explains 1.2 ; 2.1 . 1.1 !
the most common signs are spoken and written wordsanor ddc 1.2 . 2 ; 2.4-2.5 !
although god does not mention the bible , augustine gave emphasis to the possibility of god ’ s communication with humans by signs in scripture adorned ddc 1.6 ounces .
augustine developed the classical and hellenistic theories of signs .
among the mainstream in the theories of signs , i . e . , that of aristotle and that of stoics , the former theory filtered into the works of cicero cicero cicero juveniles , " de inventione rhetorica " 1.30 . 47-48 olympiad and quintilian wyliee quintiliantages circa 35-100 , " institutio oratoria " .
in his commentary on aristotle 's " de interpretatione " , ammonius said , " according to the division of the philosopher theophrastus , the relation of speech is twofold , first in regard to the audience , to which speech signifies something , and secondly in regard to the things about which the speaker intends to persuade the audience . "
the first part belongs to ddc book iv and the second part to ddc books i-iii .
augustine , although influenced by these theories , advanced his theological theory of signs , with whose help one can infer the mind of god from the events and words of scripture .
the ddc explains all kinds of signs and explains how to interpret them .
signs are divided into naturalised " naturalia " and conventionalitarian " data " foley ; the latter is divided into animalrricular " bestiae " symbolizing " homines " .
the order of readingicative " lectio " is based on textual criticism ; " emendatio " ; and " enarratio " means the hebrew language .
augustine 's understanding of signs includes several hermeneutical presuppositions as important factors .
first , the interpreter should proceed with humility .
the interpreter must have a spirit of active inquiry and should not hesitate to learn and use pagan education for the purpose of leading to christian learning .
third , the heart of interpreter should be founded , rooted , and built up in love .
the sign does not function as its own goal .
god gave signs as a means to reveal himself .
even if the scriptural text is obscure , it has meaningful benefits .
for the obscure text prevents us from falling into pride , triggers our intelligencembit 2.6 . 7euxeux , tempers our faith in the history of revelation exceeding ddc 3.8 . 12 alternatively , and refines our mind to be suitable to the holy mysteriesctor .
when interpreting signs , the literal meaning should first be sought .
augustine suggests that the obscure scriptural verse is interpreted with the help of plain and simple verses .
moreover , he introduces the seven rules of tyconius the donatist to interpret the obscure meaning of the bible .
every part of theology must be involved and interdisciplinary approaches must be taken .
