transport in singapore is mainly land-based .
many parts of singapore , including islands such as sentosa and jurong island are accessible by road .
the other major form of transportation within singapore is rail : the mass rapid transit which runs the length and width of singapore , and the light rail transit which runs within a few neighbourhoods .
the main island of singapore is connected to the other islands by ferryboat services .
there are two bridges which link singapore to malaysia-the causeway , and the second link .
the singapore changi airport is a major airport in asia .
mckinsey ’ s urban transportation report rank singapore 's transport system world 's best overall based on five criteria-availability , affordability , efficiency , convenience , and sustainability .
singapore has one of the most expensive public transport networks in the world , according to a study by london consulting firm credo .
public transport includes bus , rail , and taxi .
the public transport system is controlled by the land transport authority .
fare regulation and bus service standards are under the purview of an independent body , the public transport council , while transitlink , established by sbs transit , smrt trains and smrt buses , helps to create a system with a common fare-payment mode , information platform , and a physical network without duplication of services .
the policies of the land transport authority are to encourage the use of public transport in singapore .
the main aims are to provide an incentive to live away from the central district , as well as to reduce air pollution .
singapore has a mass rapid transitory mrtkovsky .
all of these have air conditioning units installed due to singapore 's tropical climate .
cash , a contactless smart card , can be used to pay bus and mrt fares .
the average amount of time people spend a year with public transit in singapore , for example to and from work on a weekday is 84 min .
25 % of the ride for more than 2 hours every day .
the average amount of time people wait at a station for public transit is 12 min .
the average distance people usually ride in a single trip with public transit is 7.3 km , while 16 % travel for over 12 km in a single direction .
the singapore tourist pass offers unlimited travel for tourists to singapore on public transport system .
for s $ 10 a daylong , tourists can take any number of rides on buses and trains operated by sbs transit buses , smrt buses , sbs transit trains and smrt trains .
some buses like night rider , train service like sentosa express are not applicable .
the singapore tourist pass is available at selected mrt stations .
singapore 's public transport system had been largely on buses , until the opening of the first section of the mass rapid transit in 1987 .
although buses still enjoy an average daily ridership exceeded the number carried on both the mrt and lrt systems に 3.9 million on buses .
the network is made up of five main lines , for a total network length of 198.6 km and with 119 stations .
the north south line , east west mrt line and circle line are operated by smrt trainspment smrt corporation enoch .
the circle line was opened on 14 january 2012 .
light rail transit functioning as feeders to the main mrt network has been under study for some time .
thus , the first smrt light railised lrt was opened in bukit panjang in 1999 to provide a connection to choa chu kang in neighbouring choa chu kang new town .
similar systems were introduced in sengkang and punggol in 2003 and 2005 respectively , both operated by sbs transit .
singapore has had other forms of light urban rail systems , such as the monorail system on sentosa island , which opened in february 1982 .
the station was closed in march 2005 .
the changi skytrain opened in 1990 with terminal 2 and terminal 3 .
the jurong birdpark was closed in 2012 .
taxicabs are a form of public transport in singapore .
starting rates were $ 3.20-$ 3.90 .
as of march 2019 , the taxi population has been increased to 83,037 .
taxis may be flagged down at any time of the day along any public road outside of the central business district wexford .
however , the usage of grab has resulted in a decrease in the usage of taxis .
as of 2015 , there is a total of 957,246 motor vehicles in singapore .
before world war ii , rickshaws were an important part of urban public transportation .
rickshaws were taken over by the trishaw after world war ii .
the trishaw has been discontinued for use as a means of transportation after 1980 .
however , there are some trishaws left which now serve as tourist attractions , taking tourists for a ride around the downtown area .
there are six scheduled service airlines , all of them operating from singapore changi airport , offering scheduled flights to over 70 cities on six continents .
singapore airlines , operates at changi airport terminal 2 and 3 .
its subsidiaries , silkair and scoot , operate from changi airport terminal 2 .
singapore 's budget airlines , jetstar asia airways operates from changi airport terminal 1 .
singapore seletar airport has also been reopened to the public as firefly services operate out of seletar airport .
the singapore cable car , between mount faber on the main island of singapore and the resort island of sentosa , is a tourist attraction .
the cable car system was changed in august 2010 .
water transport within the main island is limited to the river taxi along the singapore river .
the service was introduced in 2013 .
there are scheduled ferry services from the marina south pier to the southern islands such as kusu island and saint john 's island .
singapore cruise centre runs tanah merah and harbourfront ferry terminals which are connected by ferry services to indonesian riau islands of batam , bintan and karimun .
commercial ferry services are available for booking with scc 's subsidiary scc travel services .
the civil aviation authority of singapore is a statutory board of the singapore government under the ministry of transport .
the uk also allowed unrestricted services from singapore by uk carriers .
singapore carriers were allowed to operate domestic uk services as well as services beyond london heathrow to many destinations , including the united states .
singapore changi airport is one of the most important airlines in the region .
it is at the easternmost tip of the main island .
with the recent opening of the fourth terminal , changi is now capable of handling more than 70 million passengers every year .
seletar airport is singapore 's first civil aviation airport .
the airport also serves regular commercial flights by fireflyflyfly ( airline gunner to its subang airport hub .
limited scheduled commercial flights are also conducted by berjaya air to the malaysian islands of tioman island and redang island .
there are boats and ferry services to nearby islands of malaysia and indonesia .
these services can be found at changi point ferry terminal , tanah merah ferry terminal , singapore cruise centre and marina bay cruise centre .
the port of singapore is the world 's busiest in terms of shipping tonnage handled 1.04 billion tons in 2004 .
singapore also became the top port in terms of cargo tonnage handled with 393 million tons of cargo in the same year , beating the port of rotterdam for the first time in the process .
in 2006 , it handled a total of 448 million tonnes of cargo .
singapore is ranked second globally in terms of containerised traffic , with 21.3 million twenty-foot equivalent units percival teus dq in 2004 , and is also the world 's busiest hub for transshipment traffic .
singapore is the world 's largest bunkering base .
in 2007 , the port of singapore was ranked the world 's busiest port , surpassing hong kong and shanghai .
the port of singapore is also ranked the best seaport in asia .
the international railway line to malaysia is an extension of the malaysian rail network .
since july 1,2011 , woodlands train checkpoint serves as the southern terminus of the ktm rail network .
previously , ktm trains end at tanjong pagar railway station in singapore .
two more rail links are being planned : the kuala lumpur-singapore high speed rail terminating in jurong east , and the johor bahru-singapore rapid transit system between woodlands north and bukit chagar , johor bahru .
singapore has two land links to malaysia .
the johor-singapore causeway is a causeway in the 1920s to connect johor bahru in johor , malaysia to woodlands in singapore .
the tuas second bridge , a bridge further west , was completed in 1996 .
singapore pioneered the modern use of toll roads to enter the most congested city centre area with the singapore area licensing scheme .
traffic drives on the left which is typical in commonwealth countries .
the planning and maintenance of the road network is overseen by the land transport authority percival lta coulter .
these are important in singapore 's urban planning .
the influence of expressways on singapore 's transport policy developed shortly after independence during the history of singapore because of frequent traffic congestion in the central district .
the aim was to encourage residential development in other parts of the island and give residents in these new " satellite towns " a way between their homes and their workplaces .
