Critics have praised the series for its strong female protagonist, and it has acquired a strong cult following, attention in fandom, , and academia, and has influenced the direction of other television series.
The series narrative follows Xena (played by Lucy Lawless), an infamous warrior on a quest to seek redemption for her past sins against the innocent by using her formidable fighting skills to now help those who are unable to defend themselves.
Xena is accompanied by (played by Renee O'Connor), who during the series changes from a simple farm-girl into an Amazon warrior and Xena's comrade-in-arms; her initial naïveté helps to balance Xena and assists her in recognizing and pursuing the greater good.
The show is a spin-off of the television series ""; the saga began with three episodes in "Hercules" where Xena was a recurring character originally scheduled to die in her third appearance.
Aware that the character of Xena had become very successful among the public, the producers of the series decided to launch a spin-off series based on her adventures.
On August 13, 2015 NBC Entertainment chairman Bob Greenblatt said a "Xena" reboot was in development, with Raimi and Tapert returning as executive producers, with the show's debut sometime in 2016.
In August 2017, NBC announced that it had cancelled its plans for the reboot for the foreseeable future.
"Xena: Warrior Princess" is set primarily in a fantasy version of ancient Greece (sometimes alluding to Roman Greece) and was filmed in New Zealand.
Some filming locations are confidential, but many scenes were recorded in places such as the Waitakere Ranges Regional Park, part of the Auckland Regional parks often credited at the end of the episodes.
The Ancient Greece depicted in the show is largely derived from historical locations and customs, modifying known places and events – battles, trading routes, towns, and so on – to generate an attractive fictional world.
The settlements are presented as a mixture of walled villages and rural hamlets set in a lush green, mountainous landscape.
They are often seen under attack from warlords, and travelling between them involves frequent encounters with small bands of outlaws.
All of the main towns are named after historic towns of Ancient Greece, and exhibit some of their essential characteristics – Amphipolis (birthplace of Xena), Potidaea (birthplace of ), Athens (birthplace of Joxer), Corinth, Delphi, and Cirra (birthplace of Callisto) which was burnt to the ground by Xena's army.
As the show progressed, however, events took place throughout more modern times and places, from Cleopatra's Alexandria to Julius Caesar's Rome.
One episode, "The Way", which loosely interpreted elements of Hinduism as major plot points, generated controversy, requiring the producers to add a disclaimer at the head of the episode and a tag explaining the episode's intentions at its end.
The inhabitants of such places – gods, mythological beings and forces – are for the most part manifested as human characters who can move at will between their domains and the real world.
"Xena" is a historical fantasy set primarily in ancient Greece, although the setting is flexible in both time and location and occasionally features Egyptian, Indian, Chinese, Central Asian, and Medieval European elements.
While the show is typically set in ancient times, its themes are essentially modern and it investigates the ideas of taking responsibility for past misdeeds, the value of human life, personal liberty and sacrifice, and friendship.
The show often addresses ethical dilemmas, such as the morality of pacifism; however, the storylines rarely seek to provide unequivocal solutions.
"Xena" freely borrows names and themes from various mythologies around the world, primarily the Greek, anachronistically adapting them to suit the demands of the storyline.
Historical figures and events from a number of different historical eras and myths make numerous appearances, and the main characters are often credited with resolving important historical situations.
These include an encounter with Homer before he was famous, in which Gabrielle encourages his storytelling aspirations; the fall of Troy; and the capture of Caesar by pirates, with Xena cast as the pirate leader.
Competing religions are treated as compatible and co-existent in a henotheistic world, allowing the Greek Pantheon to live side by side with the Norse Gods, Indian Deities, the "God of Love" and others.
Each god, or set of gods, controls a different part of the world, and (in the show) survives only while people believe in it.
In seasons four and five, the Greek people gradually transfer their faith from the Greek Gods to the "God of Love" over a period of about 25 years, and as their power fades, the Greek Gods are almost all killed off in a climactic battle.
The first choice for Xena was the British actress Vanessa Angel, but an illness prevented her from travelling, and the role was offered to four other actresses before the relatively unknown Lawless.
Sunny Doench was cast as Gabrielle, but she did not want to leave her boyfriend in the United States, so O'Connor, who had appeared in "Hercules" in another role, was chosen.
Other notables included Karl Urban in a variety of roles such as Cupid and Caesar, Hudson Leick as Xena's nemesis Callisto (Leick also played a body-switched Xena in the episode "Intimate Stranger"), Claire Stansfield as the evil shamaness Alti; and a number of trusted friends – Jennifer Sky as feisty sidekick Amarice, Danielle Cormack as Amazon regent Ephiny, Bruce Campbell as Autolycus King of Thieves, Robert Trebor as dodgy entrepreneur Salmoneus, William Gregory Lee as the warrior-poet Virgil and Tim Omundson as the spiritual healer Eli.
Composer Joseph LoDuca wrote the theme music and incidental music, and co-wrote the lyrics for the songs in "The Bitter Suite."
The musical score of "Xena: Warrior Princess" was critically well received and garnered seven Emmy nominations for LoDuca, who won the Emmy award for Outstanding Music Composition for a Series (Dramatic Underscore) for the Season 5 episode "" in 2000.
Two of these albums contain the soundtracks from the musical episodes "The Bitter Suite" (Season 3) and "Lyre, Lyre, Hearts on Fire" (Season 5).
Xena is on a quest to redeem herself for her dark past by using her formidable fighting skills to help people.
In "Hercules", during her two first episodes, Xena was a villain and a powerful warlord, but in her third appearance she joins Hercules to defeat the warlord Darphus, who had taken her army.
During her own series, Xena spends almost every episode on a different mission, always trying to do the right thing, fighting for what she refers to as the "greater good".
Xena also has to fight her own past; she has never forgiven herself for her crimes, and often has to resist the temptation to return to her evil ways, but she always resists with the help of Gabrielle.
She is introduced in the first episode, first as a big fan of Xena and her history, but soon becomes a notable character in her own right.
As the show progresses she undergoes significant changes in costume and style, evolving from a simple farm girl to a talented bard, and eventually to a formidable warrior.
In the first season, Xena and Gabrielle meet Joxer, a comic man who styles himself "Joxer the Magnificent", and later "Joxer the Mighty."
In the first season, Xena and Gabrielle meet two of their biggest enemies: Callisto (Hudson Leick), a vengeful warrior woman, and Ares (Kevin Tod Smith), the Greek God of War.
Callisto is Xena's arch-enemy and a major antagonist over the course of the series.
She displays a bizarre brand of sadistic, gleeful, shrieking cruelty towards Xena and her associates.
Ares - suave, charming, witty, yet ruthless and amoral - often represents, especially in the early seasons, the seductive power of war and the dark side.
He offers her huge armies and historic victories, great wealth and great power, and in later seasons his love, offers which she consistently rejects despite sometimes being tempted.
Much of his relationship with Xena remains , including whether he is at least partly redeemed by his love for Xena, whether he is in fact her father, and to what extent Xena reciprocates his feelings.
He says several times that he "has a thing" for Xena, and he pursues her sexually and romantically.
This seems to prevent him killing her, even when pitted against her in deadly combat.
Likewise, it is suggested that Xena has strong feelings for Ares, but during the series she is never seen to act on them.
Other major antagonists of the show include Caesar and Alti, a Roman official and shamaness respectively.
This ultimately leads to her capture and crucifixion at his hands, and he orders his men to break her legs - an extremely painful memory which is often revisited during the series.
Alti is an evil shamaness from the Northern Amazon tribes of Siberia, who had been driven out of her tribe because of her hunger for power.
She is one of the most influential people encountered by Xena in her dark days, and possesses a wealth of spiritual powers, including travelling to the spiritual realm.
Alti is probably best known for her trademark "stare," which brings up pain and suffering from the target's life and unleashes the torment once again (in the form of both pain and physical symptoms).
When she "stares" at Xena, Xena often feels the pain of her legs being broken, her back being snapped, and a crippling barrage of attacks from her worst enemies.
This power backfires early in Season 4, when she shows Xena a vision from her future, of her and Gabrielle being crucified on Mount Amarro.
Over the course of the series, viewers were also introduced to family members of both Xena and Gabrielle, but most notably featured their children.
Xena gave her first child, a son named Solan, to a group of centaurs after the death of his father, Borias, who was killed in combat against a warrior in Xena's employ.
While aiding Xena and Boudica to defend Britannia against Caesar, comes into contact with an evil cult that tricks her into killing one of its priestesses, Meridian.
Over the next few days the child grows inside Gabrielle, and she eventually (and quite dramatically) gives birth to a girl, naming her Hope.
Being the daughter of Dahak, she quickly developed supernatural powers, and kills within hours of being born, proving to Xena that there was no chance of saving her.
Hope aged amazingly fast, and, mere months after being drifted down a river by her mother, she appeared to be about 9 years old.
During the episode "", at the end of season 4, Xena and Gabrielle were crucified by the Romans, as Caesar is betrayed and killed by Brutus.
They are later revived by a mystic named Eli with the spiritual aid of Callisto, who by that time had become an angel; Callisto also engineers a plan to have Xena conceive a daughter after the resurrection, and this child is prophesied to bring about the Twilight of the Olympian gods; this girl was named Eve.
To escape the gods' persecution, Xena and Gabrielle fake their deaths, but their plan goes awry when Ares buries them in an ice cave where they sleep for 25 years; during that time, Eve is adopted by the Roman nobleman Octavius and grows up to become Livia, the Champion of Rome, and a ruthless persecutor of Eli's followers.
After her return, Xena is able to turn Livia to repentance, and Livia takes back the name Eve and becomes the Messenger of Eli.
After Eve's cleansing by baptism, Xena is granted the power to kill gods as long as her daughter lives.
In a final confrontation, the Twilight comes to pass when Xena kills most of the gods on Olympus to save her daughter, and is herself saved by Ares when he gives up his immortality to heal the badly injured and dying Eve and Gabrielle.
The vast majority of locations in the series are fictional.
Xena described Amphipolis as "full of life", although several times it was full of death: for instance, the city became a breeding ground for demons after Xena and Gabrielle returned from their twenty-five year sleep.
This was the journey that turned her into an outstandingly fierce fighter with an evil reputation.
In a fictionalized conversation between Julius Caesar and Xena in the "Destiny" episode in , Xena tells him Stageira "is the ancient enemy of my home village, Amphipolis."
was born in Potidaea in Chalkidiki, Greece, which features many times as a rural village, which should have been portrayed as a rural fishing village.
Xena and Gabrielle rarely pass through it, but it was the main setting for the clip show "Athens City Academy of the Performing Bards", and was nearly visited in "One Against an Army" and "Blind Faith".
Xena and Gabrielle only visit Cirra once, although it is mentioned rather often.
The film features the voices of a number of actors from both "" and "Xena: Warrior Princess" - including Lucy Lawless, Kevin Sorbo, Michael Hurst and Renee O'Connor.
Since the end of the series rumors have circulated that a feature-length movie was in the works.
Actress Lucy Lawless has been quoted in several interviews saying she would be interested in participating in a "Xena" film as well.
In April 2009, however, Rob Tapert stated firmly there is no hope of a live-action "Xena" feature film, at least not any time soon or starring Lucy Lawless or Renée O'Connor.
"It's something that just won't happen...In twenty years or ten years, in some amount of years, like "McGyver", like "Charlie's Angels", it could happen like that with other actresses."
Following the continued online popularity of the show, a global campaign to directly bombard Universal Pictures with requests for a "Xena" movie was launched in April 2013.
Over the space of only a few days, hundreds of thousands of messages were sent showing support for the production of a "Xena" film starring the original cast.
After receiving nods of acknowledgement from Universal Studios offices in Australia, Finland and Spain, the efforts of the campaign were rewarded in May 2013 when Lucy Lawless stated on her Twitter account that she had been contacted by a ""chap who wants to re-invigorate the #Xena brand"" while warning fans that ""there's a lot of red tape around #XWP so don't get your knickers in a twist.
Since then, Lucy Lawless has appeared on multiple televised interviews showing her support of a potential revival of the "Xena" franchise, stating that talks are currently underway to resolve legal issues impeding the progress of a potential "Xena" movie project.
Many books have been released as tie-ins, including "The Official Guide to the Xenaverse" by Robert Weisbrot.
This includes a detailed episode guide for the first two seasons, a look behind the scenes, the story of the origin of the show, biographies of cast and crew, and trivia about the show.
In 1998, "XENA: All I Need to Know I Learned From the Warrior Princess", was published, allegedly written by Gabrielle, Bard of Potidaea and "translated" by Josepha Sherman.
In it, Gabrielle writes enthusiastically about many of the lessons that she learned.
The series has also figured in many doctoral theses, including, the thesis by French/American scholar, Dr. Anne Sweet, "Girl Power Interrogated in Xena Warrior Princess and Charmed, Social and Economic Issues at Play in the Politics of Gende"r.
There have been a number of .
The earliest ones were released by Topps Comics, Dark Horse Comics (written by Ian Edginton and John Wagner).
As of 2010, these releases have now been discontinued and are out of print as Anchor Bay no longer has the distribution rights.
Xena's popularity was exploited by Subaru when trying to stealthily target lesbian customers: one ad had a car with the license plate "XENA LVR" (Xena lover).
A subject of much interest and debate among viewers is the question of whether Xena and Gabrielle are lovers.
Jokes, innuendo, and other subtle evidence of a romantic relationship between Xena and Gabrielle is referred to as "lesbian subtext" or simply "subtext" by fans.
The issue of the true nature of the Xena/Gabrielle relationship caused intense "shipping" debates in Xena fandom, which turned especially impassioned due to spillover from real-life debates about same-sex sexuality and gay rights.
"There was always a, 'Well, she might be or she might not be' but when there was that drip of water passing between their lips in the very final scene, that cemented it for me.
In 2006, Lucy Lawless donated her personal Xena costume to the National Museum of American History.
In an interview the same year with "Smithsonian" magazine, she was asked the question "Was the Warrior Princess outfit comfortable?"
Uber was employed several times in the series, beginning with the second-season episode "The Xena Scrolls", in which the descendants of Xena, Gabrielle and Joxer meet up at an archeological dig in 1940 and unwittingly release Ares from his tomb.
On July 20, 2015, it was reported that NBC was developing a "Xena" reboot series, with Raimi and Tapert returning as executive producers, with the show's debut sometime in 2016.
Insiders also requested that Lawless returns to the series as Xena, as well as take up a role in the show's production.
These articles have resulted in frustration from fans regarding the apparent erasure of Xena's bisexuality, but Grillo-Marxuach has answered "it feels like - from a few sentences - everyone has already made up their mind about what it is I am doing.
NBC Entertainment president Jennifer Salke said, "I'd never say never on that one because it's such a beloved title but the current incarnation of it is dead."