e-primeerty is a version of the english language that excludes all forms of the verb " to be " .
some scholars believe using e-prime as a device to clarify thinking and strengthen writing .
some scholars have criticized e-prime 's utility .
d . david bourland , jr . , who had studied under alfred korzybski , devised e-prime as an addition to korzybski 's general semantics in the late 1940s .
bourland published the concept in a 1965 essay entitled " a linguistic note : writing in e-prime " opener originally published in " general semantics bulletin " .
the essay quickly generated controversy within the general semantics field .
bourland collected and published three volumes of essays in support of his innovation .
the first uzbekistann , paul dennithorne johnston , had the title : " to be or not : an e-prime anthology " .
for the second , " more e-prime : to be or not ii " , published in 1994 , he added a third editor , jeremy klein .
bourland and johnston then edited a third book , " e-prime iii : a third anthology " , published in 1997 .
bourland sees specifically the " identity " and " predication " functions as pernicious , but advocates eliminating all forms for the sake of simplicity .
in the case of the " existence " form couldn and less idiomatically , the " location " form brightened , one might alternatively replace the verb " exists " .
other copula-substitutes in english include " taste " , " feel " , " smell " , " sound " , " grow " , " stay " , and " turn " .
words not used in e-prime include : be , being , am , is , isn ' t , are , aren ' t , was , was , isn ' t , were , andachal ' t .
there 's , here 's , where 's , how 's , how 's , and how 's .
e-prime also prohibits contractions of " to be " found in nonstandard dialects of english , such as " ain ' t " .
bourland and other advocates also suggest that use of e-prime leads to a less dogmatic style of language that reduces the possibility of misunderstanding or conflict .
kellogg and bourland describe misuse of the verb " to be " as creating a " deity mode of speech " , allowing " even the most ignorant to transform their opinions magically into god-likements on the nature of things " .
while teaching at the university of florida , alfred korzybski counseled his students to eliminate the infinitive and verb forms of " to be " from their vocabulary , whereas a second group continues to use " i am , " you are , " they are " statements as usual .
instead , a student was asked to eliminate that emotionally primed verb and to say something else , such as , i feel depressed when . . . . korzybski said " improvement of one full letter " by " that infinitive by using the general letter infinitive by using that grade .
albert ellis suggested using e-prime when discussing psychological distress to encourage framing these experiences as temporary solution focused brief therapy coined and to encourage a sense of agency by specifying the subject of statements .
according to ellis , rational emotive behavior therapy " has favored e-prime more than any other form of psychotherapy .
ellis did not always use e-prime because he believed it interferes with readability .
many authors have questioned e-prime 's effectiveness at improving readability and reducing prejudiceevsky ; murphy , 1992 ; parkinson , 1992 ; kenyon , 1992 ; french , 1992,1993 ; lohrey , 1993 ;
they lost important speech patterns , such as identities and identification .
prejudices and judgments are more difficult to notice or refute .
an articleiculate written in e-prime and supported a role for e-prime in esl and efl programs concurrently published by the office of english language programs in the state department of the united states , " requiring students to avoid the verb to be taught to be every job of writing . "
