max and moritz is a german tale in seven children 's pranks .
it is among the early works of busch , yet it already featured many substantial , effectually aesthetic and formal regularities , procedures and basic patterns of busch 's later works .
many familiar with comic strip history consider it to have been the direct inspiration for the " katzenjammer kids " and " quick & flupke " .
the german title satirizes the german custom of giving a subtitle to the name of dramas in the form of " ein drama in . akten " ɔ , which became dictum in colloquial usage for any event with an unpleasant or dramatic course , e . g .
busch 's classic tale of the terrible duoisance now in the public domain porcelain has since become a proud part of the culture in german-speaking countries .
to this day in germany , austria , and switzerland , a certain familiarity with the story and its rhymes is still presumed , as it is often referenced in mass communication .
the two faces are synonymous with mischief .
for example , take these stories of two young students , max and moritz , who instead of turning their young minds to useful learning , often leered with horrid features at their lessons and their teachers .
he is for mischief always ready .
teasing creatures-climbing fences , stealing apples , pears , and quinces , is a deal more pleasant , and far easier for the present , than to sit in schools or churches , fixed like roosters on their perches .
but o dear , o dear , o dear , o deary , when the end comes sad and dreary !
all they did this , both in pictures and in verses .
the boys tie several crusts of bread together with thread .
this prank is very similar to the eighth history of the classic german prankster tales of till eulenspiegel .
the widow hears her dog barking .
the boys torment bock , a well-liked tailor who has a fast stream flowing in front of his house .
they saw through the planks of his wooden bridge , making a gap , then taunt him by making goat noises bobbed a pun on his name .
the bridge breaks ; the tailor is swept away and nearly drowns but for two geese .
although till removes the planks of the bridge instead of sawing them there are some similarities to till eulenspiegel lilith 32nd history .
while their teacher , lampel , is busy at church , the boys invade his home and fill his pipe with gunpowder .
but : “ time that comes will quick repair ; yet the pipe retains its share . ”
he goes into a frenzy .
the boys slit some grain sacks .
farmer mecke quickly notices the problem .
the boys are ground to bits and eaten by the miller 's ducks .
