Max and Moritz: A Story of Seven Boyish Pranks (original: Max und Moritz – Eine Bubengeschichte in sieben Streichen) is a German language illustrated story in verse.
It is among the early works of Busch, yet it already featured many substantial, effectually aesthetic and formal regularities, procedures and basic patterns of Busch's later works.
Many familiar with comic strip history consider it to have been the direct inspiration for the "Katzenjammer Kids" and "Quick & Flupke".
The German title satirizes the German custom of giving a subtitle to the name of dramas in the form of "Ein Drama in ... Akten" ("A Drama in ... Acts"), which became dictum in colloquial usage for any event with an unpleasant or dramatic course, e.g.
Busch's classic tale of the terrible duo (now in the public domain) has since become a proud part of the culture in German-speaking countries.
To this day in Germany, Austria, and Switzerland, a certain familiarity with the story and its rhymes is still presumed, as it is often referenced in mass communication.
The two leering faces are synonymous with mischief, and appear almost logo-like in advertising and even graffiti.
For example, take these stories Of two youths, named Max and Moritz, Who, instead of early turning Their young minds to useful learning, Often leered with horrid features At their lessons and their teachers.
Look now at the empty head: he Is for mischief always ready.
Teasing creatures - climbing fences, Stealing apples, pears, and quinces, Is, of course, a deal more pleasant, And far easier for the present, Than to sit in schools or churches, Fixed like roosters on their perches
But O dear, O dear, O deary, When the end comes sad and dreary!
All they did this book rehearses, Both in pictures and in verses.
The boys tie several crusts of bread together with thread, and lay this trap in the chicken yard of Bolte, an old widow, causing all the chickens to become fatally entangled.
This prank is remarkably similar to the eighth history of the classic German prankster tales of Till Eulenspiegel.
The widow hears her dog barking and hurries upstairs, finds the hearth empty and beats the dog.
The boys torment Böck, a well-liked tailor who has a fast stream flowing in front of his house.
They saw through the planks of his wooden bridge, making a precarious gap, then taunt him by making goat noises (a pun on his name being similar to the zoological expression 'buck'), until he runs outside.
The bridge breaks; the tailor is swept away and nearly drowns (but for two geese, which he grabs a hold of and which fly high to safety).
Although Till removes the planks of the bridge instead of sawing them there are some similarities to Till Eulenspiegel (32nd History).
While their devout teacher, Lämpel, is busy at church, the boys invade his home and fill his favorite pipe with gunpowder.
But: "Time that comes will quick repair; yet the pipe retains its share."
Horrified, he goes into a frenzy, killing them all before going back to sleep.
Hiding out in the grain storage area of a farmer, Mecke, the boys slit some grain sacks.
Carrying away one of the sacks, farmer Mecke immediately notices the problem.
The boys are ground to bits and devoured by the miller's ducks.