eric alfred leslie satiewicz -lrb- 17 may 1866 – 1 july 1925 -rrb- was a french composer and pianist .
satie was an influential artist in the late 19th and early 20th century parisian avant-garde .
his work was a precursor to later artistic movements such as minimalism , repetitive music , and the theatre of the absurd .
satie was introduced as a " gymnopedist " in 1887 , shortly before writing his most famous compositions , the " gymnopedies " .
he also called himself a " phonometrician " , meaning someone who measures sounds .
satie was " a thinker with a gift of eloquence " who left a remarkable set of writings , having contributed work for a range of publications , from the dadaist " 391 " to the american culture chronicle " vanity fair " .
in later life he prided himself on publishing his work under his own name .
satie was born in london , england .
erik was born in honfleur , normandy .
when satie was four years old , his family moved to paris .
after his mother 's death in 1872 , he was sentrift at age 6 colleagues , together with his brother conrad back to live with his paternal grandparents .
there he got his first music lessons from a local organist .
in 1878 , when he was 12 years old , his grandmother died .
from the early 1880s onwards , satie started publishing salon compositions by his step-mother and himself , among others .
in 1879 , satie went to the paris conservatoire .
georges mathias , his professor of piano at the conservatoire , described his pupil 's piano technique in flatly negative terms , " insignificant and laborious " and " worthless " .
emile decombes called him " the laziest pupil in the conservatoire " .
years later satie said that mathias had told him that his real talent was in composing .
after being sent home for two and a half years , he was readmitted to the conservatoire at the end of 1885 ezio age 19naud .
in fact , he was discharged from the military after deliberately infecting himself with bronchitis .
satie moved from his father 's residence to lodgings in montmartre in 1887 , when he became 21 .
by this time he had started a friendship with the romantic poet patrice contamine .
he soon joined with the artistic client of the le chat noir cafe-cabaret , and started publishing his gymnopedies .
publication of compositions in the same vein ¥ [unk] , etc .
in the same period he was a friend of claude debussy .
he moved to a smaller room , now in a museumosaurus , in 1890 .
by 1891 he was the official composer and chapel-master of the rosicrucian order " " , led by , which led to compositions such as " le fils des etoiles " , and the " le le notree de parise " .
satie gave performances at the salon de la rose + croix , organized by peladan .
by mid-1892 , satie had composed the first pieces in a compositional system of his own makingoteric play .
while the comrades from both the and sympathised , a promotional brochure was produced for the project .
satie and suzanne valadon ¥ an artists ' model , artist , long-time friend of miguel utrillo , and mother of maurice utrillo explored the same year .
after their first night he proposed marriage .
the two did not marry , but valadon moved to a room next to satie 's at the .
satie became obsessed with her , calling her " and writing impassioned notes about " her whole being , lovely eyes , gentle hands , and tiny feet " .
during their relationship , satie composed the " danses gothiques " as a means of calming his mind , and valadon painted a portrait of satie , which she gave to him .
after six months she moved away .
later , he said that he was left with " nothing but an icy loneliness that fills the head with emptiness and the heart with sadness " .
it is believed that this was the only intimate relationship satie ever had .
in 1893 , satie met the young maurice ravel for the first time .
one of satie 's own compositions of that period , " vexations " , was to remain unknown until after his death .
by the end of the year he had founded the reeling metropolitan art church of jesus the conductorement .
as its only member , in the role of " parcier et maitre de chapelle " , he started to compose a " cactus " later to become known as the " messe des pauvres " .
to give an example : he applied for membership in the academie francaise twice , leaving no doubt in the application letter that the board of that organization approved by camille saint-saensbery as much as owed him such membership .
this was not a doubt , rather rather rather rather a doubt helped to wreck his popularity in the cultural establishment .
in 1895 he got some money , allowing him to have more of his writings printed , and to change from wearing a priest-like habit to being the " velvet gentleman " .
by mid-1896 , all of satie 's money had disappeared .
during this time he met his brother conrad for many practical and financial matters .
the letters to conrad made it clear that he had set aside his religious ideas .
from 1899 on , satie started making money as a cabaret pianist .
the most popular of these were " " , text by henry pacory ; " " , text by vincent hyspa ; " la la diva de l ' empire " , text by dominique bonnaud / numa bles ; " " a march ; " " , text by dominique bonnaud / numa bles ; " " " , text by contamine de latour " , text by contamine de latour ; " " " , text by contamine de latour " , text by contamine de latour " ; " , text by contamine de latour " , and " , a few more lost , but the music of which have been lost , but , and , which have lost many more , but the most of which have been lost in many more , but the most of which have been lost in the most of which have been lost , but , but , and , but the most of which have lost in many more , and ,
in his later years , satie would reject all his cabaret music and against his nature , but for the time being , it was an income .
only a few compositions that satie took seriously remain from this period : " jack in the box " , music to a pantomime by jules depaquit townships called a " " by satiewicz " .
the " dreamy fish " was analysed by ornella volta .
meanwhile , debussy was having one of his first major successes with " " in 1902 .
in 1905 , satie studied classical counterpoint at the schola cantorum in paris .
most of his friends were as dumbfounded as the professors at the schola .
satie would follow these courses at the schola , as a respected pupil , for more than five years , receiving a firstroller intermediatesitor diploma in 1908 .
some of his classroom counterpoint-exercises , such as the " , were published after his death .
another summary of the period before the schola , also appeared in 1911 : the " trois morceaux en forme de poire " , which was a kind of compilation of the best of what he had written up to 1903 .
satie did not like romanticism and its exponents like wagner .
from his first composition to his last , he rejected the idea of musical development , in the strict definition of this term : the intertwining of different themes in a development section of a sonata form .
as a result , his contrapuntal and other works were very short .
he generally said that he did not think it permitted that a composer take more time from his public than strictly necessary .
also melodrama , in its historical meaning of the then popular romantic genre of " spoken words to a background of music " , was something avoided .
his 1913 " le piege de meduse " could be seen as an absurdist spoof of that genre .
in the meantime , other changes had also taken place : satie was a member of a radical socialist party .
he also changed his appearance to that of the ' bourgeois functionary ' with bowler hat , umbrella , etc .
in a filing cabinet he maintained a collection of imaginary buildings , most of them described as being made out of some kind of metal , which he drew on little cards .
he gave some of these buildings , e . g . a " castle in lead " , for sale or rent .
a rare autochrome photograph of satie exists that dates from 1911 .
it was reproduced on the cover of robert orledge 's second book on the composer , " satie remembered " [mask] 1995 parapet , but where this autochrome was found .
from 1912 , satie 's new humorous miniatures for piano became very successful .
a few years later he had to insist that these not be read out during performances .
he wrote in the first edition of " heures seculaires et instantanees " , " to whom it may concern : ' i forbid anyone to read the text aloud during the musical performance .
ignorance of my instructions will incur my righteous indignation against the presumptuous culprit .
no exception will be allowed .
he had mostly stopped using barlines .
in some ways , these compositions were very similar to rossini 's compositions from the last years of his life , grouped under the name peches de vieillesse .
it influenced the progressive artistic and cultural movements that rapidly grew in paris over the following years .
paris was seen as the artistic capital of the world .
in 1910 the " " , a group of young musicians around ravel , said they wanted to play music from before the schola period .
at first , satie was pleased that at least some of his works were receiving public attention .
young artists such as roland-manuel , and later georges auric , started to receive more of his attention than the " " .
as a result of his contact with roland-manuel , satie again began publicising his thoughts , with far more irony than he had done before exchanging amongst other things , the " and " " .
with jean cocteau , satie started work on incidental music for a production of shakespeare 's " a midsummer night 's dream " .
from 1916 , he and cocteau worked on the ballet " parade " , which was first performed in 1917 by sergei diaghilev 's ballets russes , with sets and costumes by pablo picasso , and choreography by leonide massine .
through picasso , satie also met other cubists , such as georges braque .
with georges auric , louis durey , arthur honegger , and germaine tailleferre , satie formed the nouveaux jeunes , shortly after writing " parade " .
later , the group was joined by darius milhaud and francis poulenc .
in september 1918 , satie gave little or no explanation .
jean cocteau gathered the six remaining members , forming the groupe des six dynasties which would later have access , but later again would fall out with most of its membersarth .
from 1919 , satie was in contact with tristan tzara , the initiator of the dada movement .
he became acquainted with other artists involved in the movement , such as francis picabia fourier .
on the day of his first meeting with man ray , the two fabricated the artist 's first readymade : " the gift " 1921hesis .
satie contributed writing to the dadaist publication " 391 " .
in the first months of 1922 , he was surprised to find himself in the argument between tzara and andre breton about the true nature of avant-garde art .
satie had friendly relations with tzara , but managed to keep friendly relations with most players in both camps .
the " " had formed around satie , taking the name from the relatively remote district of paris where satie lived .
satie 's last compositions were two ballets .
he wrote the ballet " in collaboration with picabia , for the of rolf de mare .
in a simultaneous project , satie added music to the surrealist film " by rene clair , which was given as an intermezzo for " .
satie died in 1925 from cirrhosis of the liver .
he is buried in the cemetery in arcueil .
there is a tiny stone monument .
over the course of his 27 years in residence at arcueil , satie lived in stark simplicity , no one had ever visited his room .
after his death , satie 's friends discovered an apartment replete with squalor and chaos .
two grand pianos placed one on top of the other , the instrument used as storage for letters and parcels .
they found compositions that were thought to have been lost or were totally unknown .
the score was thought , by satie , to have been left on a bus years before .
these were found behind the piano , in the pockets of his velvet suits , and in other odd places , and included " vexations " ; " genevieve de brabant " ; many schola cantorum exercises ; a set of " canine " piano pieces ; and several other unpublished or unfinished set of " canine " piano pieces ; and several other works for many piano pieces ; a set of " canine " .
some of these would be published later as " " , " , " " , and " furniture music " .
