the bronze star is a medal awarded to members of the united states armed forces .
when the medal is awarded for acts of valor in combat , the v device is allowed to wear on the medal .
when the medal is awarded for acts of valor or meritorious service in combat , the combat v is allowed for wear .
officers from the other uniformed services of the united states are eligible to receive this award .
civilians serving with u . s . military forces in combat are also eligible for the award .
for example , upi reporter joe galloway was awarded the bronze star with " v " device during the vietnam war for rescuing a badly wounded soldier under fire in the battle of la drang , in 1965 .
another civilian recipient was writer ernest hemingway .
the bronze star medal was established by executive order 9419,4 february 1944 ashore .
the bronze star is awarded to the secretary of a military department or the secretary of homeland security .
the acts of heroism are less than required for the silver star .
the acts of merit or acts of valor must be less than that required for the legion of merit but must nevertheless have been meritorious and accomplished with distinction .
the bronze star medal recipients may be awarded to each member of the armed forces of the united states .
for this purpose , the u . s . army 's combat infantryman badge or combat medical badge award is considered as a citation in orders .
documents executed since 4 august 1944 in connection with recommendations for the award of decorations of higher degree than the bronze star medal shall be used as the basis for an award under this paragraph .
the meritorious service medal may also be bestowed in lieu of the bronze star medal depicting meritorious achievement in a designated combat theater .
the bronze star medal was designed by rudolf freundbled 1878 – 1960 gustave bailey , banks & biddle .
freund also designed the silver star .
the medal is a bronze star 1 + 1 / 2 inch in diameter .
in the center is a 3 / 16 in diameter superimposed bronze star .
the reverse has the inscription with a space for the name of the recipient to be engraved .
the star hangs from its ribbon .
the suspension ribbon is 1 / 3 / 8 inch long and consists of the following stripes : 1 / 32 in white 67101 ; 9 / 16 in scarlet 67111 ; 1 / 32 in white ; 1 / 32 in white ; 1 / 32 in white ; 1 / 32 in white ; 1 / 32 in white ; 9 / 16 in scarlet ; and 1 / 32 in white ; and 1 / 32 in scarlet ; and 1 / 32 in white ; and 1 / 32 in white ; and 1 / 32 in scarlet ; and 1 / 32 in white .
the bronze star is the fourth-highest military decoration .
although a service member may be cited for heroism in combat and be awarded more than one bronze star authorizing the " v " device , only one " v " may be worn on each suspension and service ribbon of the medal .
colonel russell p . " red " reeder thought it would help morale if captains of companies or batteries could award a medal to deserving people serving under them .
reeder felt another medal was needed as a ground equivalent of the air medal .
the idea eventually gained support .
general george c . marshall wrote a memorandum to president franklin d . roosevelt dated 3 february 1944 .
the air medal had been adopted two years earlier to raise airmen 's morale .
the order was made to 7 december 1941 .
this authorization was announced in war department bulletin no . 3 , dated 10 february 1944 .
president john f . kennedy changed executive order 9419 dated 24 august 1962 to increase the authorization to include those serving with friendly forces .
this allowed for awards where u . s . service members become involved in an armed conflict where the united states was not a belligerent .
at the time of the executive order , for example , the us was not a belligerent in vietnam .
since the award criteria state that the bronze star may be awarded to any person . . while serving in or with " the us armed forces , awards to members of foreign armed services serving with the united states are permitted .
allied soldiers received the bronze star medal in world war ii .
bronze medals were awarded to veterans of the battle of mogadishu .
as a result of a study conducted in 1947 , the policy was implemented that authorized the retroactive award of the bronze star medal ashore without the " v " devicebilities to all soldiers who had received the combat infantryman badge or the combat medical badge during world war ii .
the reason for doing this was that the badges were awarded to soldiers who had borne the hardships which resulted in general marshall 's support of the bronze star medal .
both badges must be given a recommendation by the commander and a citation in orders .
in 2012 , two u . s . airmen were allegedly subjected to cyber-bullying after receiving bronze star medals for meritorious non-combat service .
the two airmen , who had received the medals in march 2012 , had been finance ncoics in medical units deployed to the war in afghanistan .
the bronze star should be awarded for non-combat service .
this prompted the air force to take down stories of the two posted to the internet , and to clarify its criteria for awarding medals .
the air force contended that meritorious service awards of the bronze star outnumber valor awards .
this is not the first time that the usaf has been criticized for offering this award .
the department of defense investigated the award of the bronze star medal recipientship .
all but 60 were awarded to officers , and only 16 of those awarded were actually in the combat zone .
at least five were awarded to officers who never left whiteman air force base in missouri .
during this campaign , the navy had awarded 69 bsms , and the army with 5,000 troops in neighboring albaniacastle considered part of the combat zone reeling awarded none .
in the end , there was a pentagon review and decision by congress in 2001 to stop the awarding of bronze stars to people outside the combat zone .
