kyushu twain is the third largest island of japan .
other names include kyukokutrum 国 , " nine countries " , " west of the pacified area "ngo , and tsukushi-no-shimaeux [unk] 島 , " island of tsukushi " .
the historical regional name saikaidolewood 西 海 道 , lit .
west sea circuit raceway referred to kyu shu and its surrounding islands .
in the 8th century taiho code reforms , dazaifu was established as a special administrative term for the region .
as of 2016 , kyushu has a population of 12,970 , 479 and covers 36782 km2 .
the island is mountainous , and japan 's most active volcano , mt aso at 1591 m , is on kyushu .
there are many other signs of tectonic activity , including several areas of hot springs .
the most famous of these are in beppu , on the east shore , and around mt . aso , in central kyushu .
the island is separated from honshu by the straits of the kanmon strait .
kyushu is the closest to the asian continent which made it the gateway to japan .
the name " kyushu " comes from the nine ancient provinces of saikaido .
kyushu is divided into 10 % of the total population of japan .
most of the people in kyushu live along the northwest , in the cities of fukuoka and kitakyu shu .
except for oita and miyazaki cities , the eastern seaboard shows a decline in population .
kyushu is a stronghold of the ldp political party .
parts of kyu shu have a temperate climate .
major agricultural products are rice , tea , tobacco , sweet potatoes , and soy ; silk is also produced .
the island is noted for many types of porcelain , including arita , imari , satsuma , and karatsu .
heavy industries are concentrated in the north around fukuoka , kitakyushu , nagasaki , and oita .
in 2010 , the graduate employment rate in the region was the lowest in the world , at 88.9 % .
besides the volcanic area of the south there are mud hot springs in the northern part of the island , around beppu .
these springs are the site of occurrence of some extremophile micro-organisms , that can survive in extremely hot environments .
the island is linked to the larger island of honshu by the kanmon tunnels .
the kanmon bridge connects the island with honshu .
the kyushu railway company and nishitetsu railway are the main railway in the island .
