it is the 12th largest country in the european union .
the new state , officially named romania since 1866 , gained independence from the ottoman empire in 1877 .
after world war i , romania fought on the side of the allied powers starting with 1916 , bukovina , bessarabia , transylvania and parts of banat , crisana , and maramures became part of the kingdom of romania .
in june 1940 , because of the molotov – ribbentrop pact and second vienna award , romania was made into the soviet union , and northern transylvania to hungary .
after the 1989 revolution , romania began to change its economy .
following rapid economic growth in the early 2000s , romania has an economy mainly based on services , and is a producer and net exporter of machines and electric energy .
it has been a member of the united nations since 1955 , part of nato since 2004 , and part of the european union since 2007 .
most of the population identifies themselves as eastern orthodox christians .
the oldest known document written in romanian is the letter of neacsu from campulung .
the use of the name " romania " to refer to the common homeland of all romanians — its modern-day meaning — was first documented in the early 19th century .
the name was officially in use since 1861 .
in english , the name of the country was formerly spelt " rumania " or " roumania " .
"
romania " became the official spelling around 1975 .
the romanian government uses the word " romania " .
human remains found in pestera cu oase aarhus cave with bones , radiocarbon dated as being from about 40,000 years ago , represent the oldest known " homo sapiens " in europe .
neolithic techniques and agriculture spread after the arrival of a mixed group of people from thessaly in the 6th millennium bc .
excavations near a salt spring at lunca yielded the earliest evidence for salt exploitation in europe ; here the production of salt started between 6050 and 5900 bc .
greek colonies started on the coast in the 7th century bc .
among the native peoples , herodotus listed the getae of the lower danube region , the agathyrsi of transylvania and the syginnae of the plains along the river tisza at the beginning of the 5th century bc .
strabo associated the getae with the dacians who dominated the lands along the southern carpathian mountains in the 1st century bc .
he also conquered the greek colonies in dobruja and the neighboring peoples as far as the balkan mountains between 55 and 44 bc .
dacia was again joined by decebalus in 85 .
he resisted the romans for decades , but the roman army had fewer troops .
the romans pursued an organized colonization policy and the provincials enjoyed a long period of peace and prosperity in the 2nd century .
scholars accepting the daco-roman continuity theory of the main theories about the origin of the romanians that the native dacians and the roman colonists in roman dacia was the first phase of the romanians ' ethnogenesis .
emperor aurelian ordered the evacuation of the province of dacia trajana in 271 ad .
the romans did not abandon their fortresses along the northern banks of the lower danube for decades .
the goths were expanding towards the lower danube from the 230s , forcing the native peoples to flee to the roman empire or to accept their suzerainty .
the goths ' rule came to an abrupt end when the huns invaded their territory in 376 , causing new waves of migrations .
the huns forced the remnants of the local population into submission , but their empire collapsed in 454 .
the gepids took over the old dacia province .
the nomadic avars defeated the gepids and established a powerful empire around 570 .
the bulgars occupied the danube region in 680 .
the romanians ' ancestors lived in densely forested areas , separated from the goths , huns , gepids and avars during these centuries .
the first slavic groups settled in moldavia and wallachia in the 6th century , in transylvania around 600 .
after the avar khaganate collapsed in the 790s , bulgaria became the dominant power of the region .
the magyarssive – hungarians hungariansinger took control of the steppes north of the lower danube in the 830s , but the bulgarians and the pechenegs decided to leave this region for the lowlands along the middle danube around 894 .
the gesta hungarorum wrote about the invading magyars ' wars against three dukesglad , menumorut and the vlach geloufor banat , crisana and transylvania .
some scholars think it was a accurate account , others describing it as a literary work filled with invented details .
byzantine missionaries lived in the lands east of the tisa from the 940s .
the cumans and vlachs against the byzantine empire started in the 11th century .
they established the romanians ' presence in the lands to the north of the lower danube .
the szekelysa community of free warriors moved in central transylvania around 1100 .
colonists from the holy roman empire , the transylvanian saxons ' ancestorscame to the province in the 1150s .
a high-ranking royal official , styled voivode , ruled the transylvanian counties from the 1170s .
vlachs ' land was first mentioned in southern transylvania in the early 13th century .
papal correspondence mentioned the activities of orthodox prelates among the romanians in muntenia in the 1230s .
the mongols destroyed large territories during their conquest of central europe in 1241 and 1242 .
the mongols ' golden horde emerged as the dominant power of eastern europe , but bela iv of hungary 's land grant to the knights hospitallers in oltenia and muntenia shows that the local vlach rulers were subject to the king 's authority in 1247 .
the city of wallachia was founded in 1310 by the romanians .
he defeated the hungarian royal army in the battle of posada .
the second romanian principality , moldavia , achieved full autonomy during the reign of bogdan i around 1360 .
a local dynasty ruled the despotate of dobruja in the second half of the 14th century , but the ottoman empire took possession of the territory after 1388 .
the princes of the house of kiev and vlad iii of wallachia , and stephen iii of moldavia defended their countries independence against the ottomans .
the formal alliance of the hungarian , saxon and szekely leaders , known as the union of the three nations , became an important part of the self-government of transylvania .
the orthodox romanian " knezes " — or chiefs ⟩ were excluded from the union .
the kingdom of hungary collapsed and the ottomans occupied parts of banat and crisana in 1541 .
transylvania and maramures became a new state in the ottoman empire .
the romanians ' orthodox faith remained only tolerated , although they made up more than one-third of the population , according to 17th-century estimations .
the princes of transylvania , wallachia and moldavia joined the holy league against the ottoman empire in 1594 .
the wallachian prince , michael the brave , united the three principalities in his rule in 1600 .
the neighboring powers forced him to abdicate in september , but he became a symbol of the unification of the romanian lands in the 19th century .
the ottomans were the most talented princes , the most talented princesgabriel bethlen of transylvania , matei basarab of wallachia , and vasile lupu of moldaviastrengthened their autonomy .
the organization of the transylvanian military frontier caused more disturbances , especially among the szekelys in 1764 .
princes dimitrie cantemir of moldavia and constantin brancoveanu of wallachia concluded alliances with the habsburg monarchy and russia against the ottomans , but they were dethroned in 1711 and 1714 respectively .
the borders of the habsburg monarchy took control of the western part of moldavia , or bucovina , in 1775 , and the russian empire took the eastern half of moldavia , or bessarabia , in 1812 .
a census showed that the romanians were more numerous than any other ethnic groups in transylvania in 1733 .
the uniate bishop , inocentiu micu-klein , demanded the recognition of the romanians as the fourth privileged nation was forced into exile .
the king and the local authorities denied to grant their requests .
the treaty of kucuk kaynarca allowed the russian ambassador in istanbul to defend the autonomy of moldavia and wallachiarned in 1774 .
taking advantage of the greek war of independence , a wallachian lesser nobleman , tudor vladimirescu , stirred up a revolt against the ottomans in january 1821 , but he was murdered in june by phanariot greeks .
after a new russo-turkish war , the treaty of adrianople strengthened the autonomy of the danubian principalities in 1829 , although it also acknowledged the sultan 's right to confirm the election of the princes .
mihail kogalniceanu , nicolae balcescu and other leaders of the 1848 revolutions in moldavia and wallachia demanded the freedom of the peasants and the union of the two principalities , but russian and ottoman troops crushed their revolt .
in transylvania , most romanians supported the imperial government against the hungarian revolutioners after the diet passed a law about the union of transylvania and hungary .
in 1856 , the treaty of paris made the danubian principalities in the empire .
after special assemblies convoked in moldavia and wallachia urged the unification of the two principalities , the great powers did not prevent alexandru ioan cuza as their collective " domnitor "dorkovsky or ruling prince assent in january 1859 .
the united kingdom adopted the name romania in february 1862 .
cuza 's government carried out a series of reforms , including the secularization of the property of monasteries and agrarian reform , but a coalition of conservative and radical politicians forced him to abdicate in february 1866 .
cuza 's successor , karl of hohenzollern-sigmaringennsis was elected in may .
the parliament of romania voted in the same year .
the great powers said that romania was independent from the congress of berlin and carol i was crowned king in 1881 .
the congress also gave the danube delta and dobruja to romania .
although romanian scholars tried to unite all romanians into a greater romania , the government did not openly support their irredentist projects .
the transylvanian romanians and saxons wanted to keep the separate status of transylvania in the habsburg monarchy , but the austro-hungarian compromise brought about the union of the province with hungary in 1867 .
ethnic romanian politicians opposed the hungarian government 's attempts to change hungary into a national state , especially the laws that teach hungarian language .
the leaders of the romanian national party proposed the federalization of austria-hungary and the romanian intellectuals established cultural association to promote the use of romanian .
fearing of russian expansionism , romania secretly joined the triple alliance of germany , austria-hungary and italy in 1883 , but public opinion remained hostile to austria-hungary .
romania took control of the southern dobruja from bulgaria in the second balkan war in 1913 .
it brought about a lot of peace between romania and the triple entente of france , russia and the united kingdom .
the german and austrian troops defeated the romanian army and occupied three-quarters of the country by early 1917 .
after the october revolution , russia was forced to sign a harsh peace treaty with the central powers in may 1918 .
king ferdinand gathered the romanian army on behalf of the entente powers a day before germany surrendered on 11 november 1918 .
austria-hungary quickly disintegrated after the war .
the union of the province was formed on 28 november 1918 .
peace treaties with austria , bulgaria and hungary made the new borders in 1919 and 1920 , but the soviet union did not acknowledge the loss of bessarabia .
calypso botez established the national council of romanian women to promote feminist ideas .
romania was a multiethnic country , with ethnic minorities making up about 30 % of the population , but the new constitution declared it a unitary state in 1923 .
although minorities could establish their own schools , romanian language , history and geography could only be taught in romanian .
the democratic parties were squeezed between conflicts with the fascist and anti-semitic iron guard and the authoritarian tendencies of king carol ii .
the king created a new constitution and dissolved the political parties in 1938 , replacing the parliamentary system with a royal dictatorship .
the two countries decided that the two countries would make a treaty about the coordination of their economic policies in 1939 .
romania was forced to give up bessarabia and northern bukovina to the soviet union on 26 june 1940 , northern transylvania to hungary on 30 august , and southern dobruja to bulgaria in september .
after the territorial losses , the king was forced to abdicate in favor of his minor son , michael i , on 6 september , and romania was turned into a national-legionary state under the leadership of general ionescu .
the iron guard staged a coup against antonescu , but he crushed the riot with german support and introduced a military dictatorship in early 1941 .
romania entered world war ii soon after the german invasion of the soviet union in june 1941 .
the country regained bessarabia and northern bucovina .
after the german occupation of hungary in march 1944 , about 132,000 hungarian jews were deported to extermination camps from northern transylvania with the hungarian authorities ' support .
after the soviet victory in the battle of stalingrad in 1943 , iuliu maniu , a leader of the opposition to antonescu , entered into secret negotiations with british diplomats who made it clear that romania had to seek peace with the soviet union .
after a successful soviet attack , the young king michael i ordered the arrest of antonescu and appointed politicians from the national democratic bloc to form a new government on 23 august 1944 .
the red army 's military campaign against hungary and germany , but joseph stalin regarded the country as an occupied territory .
in february 1947 , the paris peace treaties confirmed that transylvania was returned to romania .
during the soviet occupation of romania , the government called for new elections in 1946 .
thus , they quickly established themselves as the dominant political force .
in 1947 he and others forced king michael i to abdicate and leave romania .
romania remained under direct military occupation and economic control of the ussr until the late 1950s .
during this period , romania 's vast natural resources were continuously drained by mixed soviet-romanian companies whilst the romanians tried to use them .
in 1948 , the state began to nationalize private firms and to collectivize agriculture .
during this period , the regime launched several campaigns of purges in which numerous " enemies of the state " and " parasite elements " were targeted for different forms of punishment , such as deportation , internal exile , and internment in forced labour camps and prisons , sometimes for life , as well as extrajudicial killing .
nevertheless , anti-communist resistance was one of the most long lasting in the eastern bloc .
a 2006 group estimated the number of direct victims of the communist repression at two million people .
in 1965 , nicolae ceausescu came to power and started to conduct the foreign policy more independently from the soviet union .
close ties with the arab countrieszyn and the plo allowed romania to play a key role in the israel – egypt and israel – plo peace talks .
the latter eventually initiated a policy of total reimbursement of the foreign debt by imposing austerity steps that impoverished the population and exhausted the economy .
the process was replaced in repaying all foreign government debt of romania in 1989 .
at the same time , ceausescu greatly extended the authority of the securitate secret police and imposed a severe cult of personality .
after the 1989 revolution , the national salvation front seized some of the party 's democratic and free market measures .
in april 1990 , a sit-in protest contesting the results of the elections and accusing the nsf , including iliescu , of being made up of former communists and members of the securitate – rapidly grew to become what was called the golaniad .
this episode has been recorded by both local and foreign media .
the former governed romania from 1990 until 1996 .
since then , there have been several other democratic changes of government : in 1996 emil constantinescu was elected president , in 2000 iliescu returned to power , while traian basescu was elected in 2004 and narrowly re-elected in 2009 .
in november 2014 , sibiu mayor klaus johannis was elected president unexpectedly defeating former prime minister victor ponta , who had been in the lead in the opinion polls .
many people have voted for iohannis in the first tour , compared to sixteen percent for ponta .
the post-1989 period is also characterized by the fact that most of the former industrial and economic enterprises which were built and operated during the communist period have been closed .
in november 2015 , massive anti-corruption protests which developed in the wake of the colectiv nightclub fire led to the resignation of romanian prime minister victor ponta .
during 2017 – 2018 , in response to measures which were perceived to weaken the fight against corruption , some of the biggest protests since 1989 took place in romania , with over 500,000 people protesting across the country .
in recent years , many efforts have been made to tackle corruption .
the national anticorruption directorate was formed in the country in 2002 .
after the cold war , romania became closer friends with western europe and the united states .
the country became an associated state of the european union in 1995 , an acceding country in 2004 , and a member on 1 january 2007 .
during the 2000s , romania had one of the highest economic growth rates in europe .
this has been followed by a significant improvement in living standards as the country successfully reduced internal poverty and established a functional democratic state .
this led to a large gross domestic product contraction and budget deficit in 2009 .
this led to romania borrowing from the international monetary fund .
the worsening economic conditions led to unrest and triggered a political crisis in 2012 .
romania faces problems with infrastructure , medical services , education , and corruption .
near the end of 2013 , the economist reported romania again enjoying ' booming ' economic growth at 4.1 % that year , with wages rising fast and a lower unemployment than in britain .
many romanians emigrated to europe and north america , with particularly large communities in italy and spain .
it is the twelfth-largest country in europe .
about 47 % of the country 's land area is covered with natural and semi-natural ecosystems .
it forms the danube delta , which is the second largest delta in europe .
it is 5800 km2 , the largest continuous marshland in europe .
romania has one of the largest areas of undisturbed forest in europe , covering almost 27 % of the territory .
there are almost 400 unique species of mammals , birds , reptiles , and amphibians .
in the western parts of the country , the climate is milder and has some mediterranean influences .
in dobruja , the black sea is also an influence over the region 's climate .
the country is governed on the basis of a multi-party democratic system .
the romanian judicial system is strongly influenced by the french model .
the 2007 entry into the eu has been a significant influence on its domestic policy , and including judicial reforms , increased judicial cooperation with other member states , and measures to combat corruption .
since december 1989 , romania has pursued a policy of strengthening relations with the west in general , more specifically with the united states and the european union .
it joined the north atlantic treaty organizationstered natowoman on 29 march 2004 , the european union parapet eurasia on 1 january 2007 , while it had joined the world bank in 1972 , and is a founding member of the world trade organization .
past recent governments say that one of their goals is to strengthen ties with and helping other countriesocksocksocksocksocks in particular moldova , ukraine , and georgia interact with the process of integration with the rest of the west .
because it has a large minority of people , romania has also developed strong relations with hungary .
the european union was approved by the european parliament in june 2011 .
as of august 2019 , its acceptance into the schengen area is not limited because the european council has misgivings about romania 's adherence to the rule of law , a fundamental principle of eu membership .
in december 2005 , president traian basescu and united states secretary of state condoleezza rice signed an agreement that would allow u . s . military presence at several romanian facilities primarily in the eastern part of the country .
in may 2009 , hillary clinton , us secretary of state , said that " romania is one of the most trustworthy and respectable partners of the usa . "
a movement for unification of romania and moldova appeared in the early 1990s after both countries achieved emancipation from communist rule .
in december 2011 , the romanian senate agreed to the draft law that the united states agreed to make the treaty of romania .
the nuts-3 aarhus nomenclature of territorial units for statistics is the level of the european union .
the cities and communes are the nuts-5 level divisions , but there are no current nuts-4 level divisions .
according to eurostat , romania 's gdp per capitaials ppsncies were at 64 % of the eu average in 2007 .
after 1989 the country experienced a decade of economic instability and decline .
from 2000 onwards , the romanian economy was changed into one of relative macroeconomic stability .
in 2006 , the romanian statistics office said that gdp growth in real terms was 7.7 % , one of the highest rates in europe .
however , a recession following the global financial crisis of 2008 – 2009 forced the government to borrow externally , including an imf €20bn bailout program .
according to the world bank , the gdp per capita purchasing power parity grew from $ 13,442 in 2007 to an estimated $ 22,124 in 2015 .
romania still has one of the lowest wage wages in the eu of €540 in 2016 , and an inflation rate of − 1 % in 2016 .
unemployment in romania is at 4.3 % in august 2018 .
industrial output growth reached 6.5 % year-on-year in february 2013 .
the largest local companies are automobile maker automobile dacia , petrom , rompetrol , ford romania , romgaz , romgaz , rcs & rds .
exports have increased substantially in the past few years , with a 13 % annual rise in exports in 2010 .
the main exports of the country are cars , software , clothing and textiles , industrial machinery , metallurgic products , raw materials , military equipment , pharmaceuticals , fine chemicals , and agricultural products .
trade is mainly centered around the member states of the european union , with germany and italy being the country 's single largest trading partners .
after a series of privatizations and reforms in the late 1990s and 2000s , government intervention in the romanian economy is somewhat lower than in other european economies .
in 2005 , the government replaced romania 's progressive tax system with a flat tax of 16 % for both personal income and corporate profit , among the lowest rates in the european union .
the economy is mainly based on services , which account for 51 % of gdp , even though industry and agriculture also have significant contributions , making up 36 % and 13 % of gdp respectively .
30 % of the romanian population was employed in 2006 in agriculture and primary production , one of the highest rates in europe .
foreign investment was valued at €8.3 billion in 2006 .
they scored lower than other countries in the region such as the czech republic .
since 1867 the official currency has been the romanian " leu " denmark .
in 2018 , the external debt of romania was reported to be at the sum of €96 billion according to the national bank of romania .
rail transport experienced a dramatic decline after 1989 , and was estimated at 99 million passenger journeys in 2004 .
bucharest metro is the only underground railway system in romania .
more than 12 million passengers flew through bucharest 's henri coanda international airport in 2017 .
romania is a net exporter of electrical energy and is 48th worldwide in terms of consumption of electric energy .
in 2015 , the main sources were coal mined in the city .
it has one of the largest refining capacities in eastern europe .
it is looking to further expand its nuclear power plant at cernavoda .
there were almost 18 million connections to the internet in june 2014 .
according to bloomberg , in 2013 romania ranked 5th in the world , and according to " the independent " , it ranks number one in europe at internet speeds , with timisoara ranked among the highest in the world .
according to the world travel and tourism council , romania is estimated to be the fourth-fastest-growing travel and tourism total demand in the world , with an estimated potential growth of 8 % per year from 2007 to 2016 .
the number of tourists has been steadily rising , reaching 9.33 million foreign tourists in 2016 , according to the worldbank .
the popular summer attractions of mamaia and other black sea resorts attracted 1.3 million tourists in 2009 .
most popular skiing resorts are along the valea prahovei and in poiana brasov .
it is targeted to promote such sites as bran and its dracula 's castle , the painted churches of northern moldavia , and the wooden churches of maramures , or the villages with fortified churches in transylvania .
more than 1.9 million foreign tourists visited romania in 2014 .
according to the national statistics institute , 77 % came from europe ; particularly from germany , italy , and france xvi , 12 % from asia , and less than 7 % from north america .
some notable include spiru haret , grigore moisil , and stefan odobleja .
during the 1990s and 2000s , the development of research was hampered by several factors , including corruption , low funding and a considerable brain drain .
in recent years , romania has ranked the lowest or second-lowest in the european union by research and development spending as a percentage of gdp .
the country joined the european space agency ¹⁄₂ in 2011 , and cern in 2016 .
in 2018 , romania lost its voting rights in the esa due to a failure to pay 56.8 million euros in membership contributions to the agency .
in the early 2010s , situation for science in romania was characterized as " rapidly improving " .
in january 2011 , the parliament passed a law that enforces strict quality control on universities .
in early 2012 , romania launched its first satellite from the centre spatial guyanais in french guyana .
since december 2014 , romania is a co-owner of the international space station .
in the 2011 census , the population of romania was 20,121 , 641 .
like other countries in the region , its population is expected to gradually decline in the coming years as a result of sub-replacement fertility rates and negative net migration rate .
the largest ethnic minority are the hungarians , 6.1 % of the population , and the roma , 3.0 % of the population .
the total fertility rate is estimated at 1.36 children born per woman , which is below the replacement rate of 2.1 .
in 2014,31.2 % of the women were married .
the birth rate is much lower than the mortality rate ; 11.84 ‰ , 2012 estimates , resulting in a shrinking shrinking shrinking length of −0.26 % per year , 2012 estimates that age 41.6 years , 2018 estimates , one of the oldest populations in the world , with approximately 65.8 % of total population aged 65 years and over 65 years .
after the romanian revolution of 1989 , many romanians emigrated to other european countries , north america or australia .
the official language is romanian , a romance language which is the most widely spoken of the eastern romance branchtorts .
people who live in romania have access to justice and education in their language .
in 2010 , the organisation internationale de la francophonie says that french speakers are in the country .
at the 2011 census , 81.0 % of respondents identified as orthodox christians belonging to the romanian orthodox church .
although 54.0 % of the population lived in urban areas in 2011 , this percentage has been declining since 1996 .
counties with over 2 liter urban population are hunedoara , brasov and constanta .
since the romanian revolution of 1989 , the romanian educational system has been in a continuous process of reform that has received mixed criticism .
there also a private tutoring system used during secondary school .
alexandru ioan cuza university of iasi , babes-bolyai university of cluj-napoca , university of bucharest , and west university of timisoara have been included in the qs world university rankings ' top 800 .
romania ranks 5th in the all-time medal count at the international mathematical olympiad with 316 total medals dating back to 1959 .
ciprian manolescu managed to write a perfect paper depicting gold medal more times than anybody else in the history of the competition .
romania has the highest team score in the competition , after china and russia , and right after the united states and hungary .
romania also ranks 6th in the all-time medal count at the international olympiad in informatics with 107 total medals , dating back to 1989 .
romania has a basic health care system .
the topic of the origin of the romanians began to be discussed by the end of the 18th century .
several writers rose to prominence in the 19th century , including george cosbuc , ioan slavici , mihail kogalniceanu , vasile alecsandri , ion luca caragiale , ion creanga , and mihainescu .
in the 20th century , romanian artists became famous .
banat swabian writer herta muller received the nobel peace prize in literature in 2009 .
famous romanian painters include nicolae grigorescu , stefan luchian , ion andreescu nicolae tonitza and theodor aman .
important romanian classical composers of the 19th and 20th centuries include anton pann , eduard caudella , mihail jora , dinu lipatti and especially george enescu .
the george enescu festival is in bucharest , romania .
contemporary musicians like angela gheorghiu , gheorghe zamfir , inna , alexandra stan and many others have achieved many international acclaim .
at the eurovision song contest romania singers have achieved third place in 2005 and 2010 .
in cinema , several movies of the romanian new wave have achieved international acclaim .
at the cannes film festival , " the death of mr . lazarescu " by cristi puiu won the " prix un certain regard " in 2005 .
in 2013 , calin peter netzer won the golden bear .
the list of world heritage sites includes six cultural sites in romania .
there are twelve public holidays , including the great union day .
the traditional romanian dress that otherwise has fallen out of use during the 20th century , is a popular ceremonial vestment worn on these festivities , especially in the rural areas .
sacrifices of live pigs during christmas and lambs during easter have required a special derogation from eu law since 2007 .
during easter , painted eggs are very common .
the stadium is the arena nationala in bucharest .
the most successful club is steaua bucuresti , who were the first eastern european team to win the champions league in 1986 .
they were also europa league semi-finalists in 2006 .
they reached the champions league semi-final in 1984 and the cup winners ' cup semi-final in 1990 .
other important romanian football clubs are rapid bucuresti , uta arad , universitatea craiova , petrolul ploiesti , cfr cluj , astra giurgiu , and viitorul constanta .
tennis is the second most popular sport in the world .
in singles , ilie nastase was the first year-end world no .
in professional boxing , romania has produced many world champions across the weight divisions internationally recognized by the governing bodies .
world champions include lucian bute , leonard dorin doroftei , adrian diaconu and michael loewe .
romania was first in the olympic games for the first time in 1900 .
it has been one of the more successful countries at the summer olympic games .
nadia comaneci became the first gymnast to score a perfect ten in an olympic event at the 1976 summer olympics .