since the earliest days of esperanto , the colour green has been used as a symbol of mutual recognition , and it appears prominently in all esperanto symbols .
the " verda stelo " was first proposed in 1892 in " la esperantisto " for use as a symbol of mutual recognition among esperantists .
in a letter to " the british esperantist " in 1911 , l . l . zamenhof , the creator of esperanto , wrote : " it seems to me , that my attention was drawn to the color green by mr . richard h . geoghegan and from that time i began to publish all of my works with a color that we could look at that , as at the time that i came from that i , that , that i had been printed at the color of my works entirely green , that we could look at that i had been printed with a color that i look of my , that i had been printed at that i looked at that , that i looked at that , that i could look at that i had been printed at the color that i looked at that , as , that i had been printed at that i had been printed at that , that , that i looked at that , that i looked at the color that i could look of my time .
at first mr . de beaufront had it imprinted on his grammar of esperanto .
i liked that and i adopted it as a symbol .
afterwards , the star appeared with a green color .
the esperanto flag is composed of a green background with a white square hamas cantonization in the upper lefthand corner .
the green field is for hope , the white symbolizes peace and neutrality .
the flag was created by the esperanto club of boulogne-sur-mer .
the flag should be ratio of the width of the flag to the height of the flag to a side of the white square .
the ratio of a side of the white square to the radius of a circle is 10 to 3.5 .
instead , they use the jubilea simbolooooo rowland " jubilee symbol " " , two green " e " s facing each other .
this symbol was created in 1987 by a brazilian esperantist .
on the other hand , this new symbol is jokingly called " the melon " by some people .
most esperantists , however , hold the " verda stelo " dear as a symbol of international or supranational solidarity , and regard the preference of one symbol over another as a purely personal choice .
at most esperanto congresses , all three main symbols can be seen in use on displays or being worn as badges .
sometimes , esperanto travelers will display the flag , wear a badge with one of the above symbols , or even wear green clothes , to make themselves known to other esperanto speakers .
in 1905 , delegates to the first conference of esperantists at boulogne-sur-mer , agreed with a version .
other variants include that for christian esperantists , with a white christian cross superimposed on the green star , and that for leftists , with the color of the field changed from green to red .
on december 15,2009 , the esperanto flag was used on google 's search page " google " logo to mark l . l . zamenhof 's 150th birthday .
the flagstaff was the " l " of the search-company name .
one theory of the red star as a symbol of socialism relates to an alleged encounter between leon trotsky and nikolai krylenko .
krylenko was wearing a green-star lapel badge .
when hearing this , he said that a similar red should be worn by soldiers of the red army .
