autism is a spectrum disorder .
parents usually notice signs during the first three years of their child 's life .
these signs often develop gradually , though some children with autism reach their developmental milestones at a normal pace before worsening .
autism is a disease that is caused by a combination of different things .
risk factors during pregnancy include some infections , such as rubella , toxins including valproic acid , alcohol , cocaine , pesticides and air pollution , fetal growth restriction , and autoimmune diseases .
controversies surround other proposed environmental causes ; for example , the vaccine hypothesis , which has been disproven .
autism affects information processing in the brain by altering connections and organization of nerve cells and their synapses .
how this occurs is not well understood .
in the dsm-5 , autism and less severe forms of the condition , including asperger syndrome and pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified specified pdd-nostness syndrome have been combined into the diagnosis of asd -lrb- asd -rrb- asdggs syndrome .
this may help children with self-care , social , and communication skills .
there is no cure , but there have been many cases of children who recovered .
not many children with autism live independently after reaching adulthood .
some people seeking a cure and others believe autism should be accepted as a difference and not treated as a disorder .
in 2015 , about 23 million people suffer from autism .
in the 2000s , the number of people affected was estimated at 1-2 per 1,000 people worldwide .
in the developed countries , about 1.5 % of children are diagnosed with asd as of 2008 , from 0.7 % in the united states .
it occurs four to five times more often in males than females .
the number of people diagnosed has increased since the 1960s .
the question of whether actual rates have increased is unresolved .
autism is a highly variable neurodevelopmental disorder .
people with autism may be severely impaired in some respects but normal , or even superior , in others .
overt symptoms gradually begin after the age of six months .
it is distinguished not by a single symptom .
other aspects , such as atypical eating , are also common but are not essential for diagnosis .
individual symptoms of autism occur in the general population .
the spectrum disorders are related to autism , and are related .
people with autism often have very little information .
autistic temple grandin described her inability to understand the social communication of neurotypicals , or people with normal neural development , as leaving her feeling " like an anthropologist on mars " .
unusual social development becomes apparent early in childhood .
autistic infants show less attention to social stimuli , smile and look at others less often , and respond less to their own name .
they do not have the ability to use simple movements to express themselves , such as pointing at things .
three to five-year-old children with autism are less likely to exhibit social understanding , approach others spontaneously , imitate and respond to emotions , communicate nonverbally , and take turns with others .
however , they do form attachments to their primary caregivers .
most children with autism display moderately less attachment than neurotypical children .
older children and adults with asd perform worse on tests of face and emotion recognition .
children with high-functioning autism suffer from more intense and frequent loneliness compared to non-autistic peers .
making and maintaining friendships are hard for people with autism .
for them , the quality of friendships , not the number of friends , predicts how lonely they feel .
people who get invitations to parties may affect the quality of life more deeply .
there are many reports about aggression and violence in individuals with asd .
in children with intellectual disability , autism is associated with aggression , destruction of property , and meltdowns .
about a third to a half of people with autism do not have enough natural speech to meet their daily communication needs .
differences in communication may be present from the first year of life .
in the second and third years , children with autism have less frequent and less diverse babbling , consonants , words , and word combinations .
children with autism are less likely to make requests or share experiences .
joint attention seems to be necessary for functional speech .
they may look at a pointing hand instead of the pointed-at object .
children with autism may have trouble with imaginative play and with developing symbols into language .
in a pair of studies , high-functioning children with autism aged 8 – 15 performed equally well as adults better than , individually matched controls at basic language tasks involving vocabulary and spelling .
both autistic groups performed worse than controls at complex language tasks such as figurative language , comprehension and inference .
as people are often sized up first from their basic language skills , these studies suggest that people speaking to autistic individuals are more likely to overestimate what their audience comprehends .
autistic individuals can display many forms of repetitive or restricted behavior .
no single repetitive or self-injurious behavior seems to be specific to autism , but autism seems to have an elevated pattern of occurrence and severity of these behaviors .
autistic individuals may have symptoms which are independent of the diagnosis , but that can affect the individual or the family .
about 0.5 % to 10 % of individuals with asd show unusual abilities .
many individuals with asd show superior skills in perception and attention , relative to the general population .
sensory abnormalities are found in over 90 % of people with autism .
differences are greater for under-responsivitykovsky for example , walking into thingswalks than for over-responsivity ashore .
autistic people have motor signs that include poor muscle tone , poor motor planning , and toe walking .
unusual eating behavior occurs in about three-quarters of children with asd .
selectivity is the most common problem .
parents of asd have high levels of stress .
they were similar to siblings of children with down syndrome .
siblings of individuals with asd have greater risk of negative relationships and poorer sibling relationships as adults .
there is tentative evidence that autism occurs more frequently in people with gender dysphoria .
gastrointestinal problems are one of the most commonly associated medical disorders in people with autism .
these are linked to greater social impairment , irritability , behavior and sleep problems , language impairments and mood changes .
there is a common cause at the genetic , cognitive , and neural levels for autism 's characteristic triad of symptoms .
there is increasing suspicion that autism is instead a complex disorder .
autism has a strong genetic basis , although the genetics of autism are complex .
there are many different kinds of epigenetic factors which do not change dna sequencing but are heritable and influence gene expression .
many genes have been linked with autism .
studies of twins suggest that heritability is 0.7 for autism and as high asd , and siblings of those with autism are about 25 times more likely to be autistic than the general population .
however , most of the mutations that increase autism risk have not been identified .
autism syndrome is a genetic mutation or a single-gene mutation .
numerous candidate genes have been found .
most loci individually explain less than 1 % of cases of autism .
the large number of autistic individuals with unaffected family members may result from spontaneous structural variation – such as deletions , duplications or inversions in genetic material during meiosis .
a substantial fraction of autism cases may be traceable to genetic causes that are highly heritable but not inherited : that is , the mutation that causes the autism is not present in the parental genome .
autism may be underdiagnosed in women and girls due to an assumption that it is primarily a male condition .
maternal nutrition and inflammation during preconception and pregnancy influences neurodevelopment .
intrauterine growth restriction is associated with asd , in both term and preterm infants .
maternal inflammatory and autoimmune diseases may damage fetal tissues , aggravating a genetic problem or damaging the nervous system .
exposure to air pollution during pregnancy , especially heavy metals and particulates , may increase the risk of autism .
environmental factors that have been said to contribute to or exacerbate autism include certain foods , solvents , phenols , and phenols used in plastic products , pesticides , brominated flame retardants , alcohol , smoking , illicit drugs , vaccines , vaccines , and prenatal stress .
some , such as the mmr vaccine , have been completely disproven .
parents may first become aware of autistic symptoms in their child around the time of a routine vaccination .
this has led to unsupported theories blaming vaccine " overload " , a vaccine preservative , or the mmr vaccine for causing autism .
the latter theory was supported by a litigation-funded study that has since been shown to have been " an elaborate fraud " .
parental concern about a potential vaccine link with autism has led to lower rates of childhood immunizations , outbreaks of previously controlled childhood diseases in some countries , and the preventable deaths of several children .
the symptoms of autism are related , but not all , as it is related .
there is no evidence that autism happens .
the pathophysiology of brain structures and processes associated with autism , and the neuropsychological linkages between brain structures and behaviors .
the behaviour of animals appears to have many different treatments .
there is evidence that gut – brain abnormalities may be involved .
a 2015 review suggested that immune dysregulation , gastrointestinal inflammation , malfunction of the autonomic nervous system , gut flora alterations , and food metabolites may cause brain neuroinflammation and dysfunction .
a 2016 review concludes that enteric nervous system abnormalities might play a role in neurological disorders such as autism .
neural connections and the immune system are a pathway that allows diseases originated in the intestine to spread to the brain .
there are many different kinds of autism .
some rare mutations may lead to autism by disrupting some synaptic pathways , such as those involved with cell adhesion .
gene replacement studies in mice suggest that autistic symptoms are closely related to later developmental steps that depend on activity in synapses and on activity-dependent changes .
all known teratogens ( agents that cause birth defects related to the risk of autism appear to act during the first eight weeks from conception .
diagnosis is based on behavior , not cause or mechanism .
under the dsm-5 , there are persistent deficits in social communication and interaction across multiple contexts , as well as restricted , repetitive patterns of behavior , interests , or activities .
these deficits are present in early childhood , typically before age three , and lead to significant functional impairment .
sample symptoms include lack of social or emotional reciprocity , stereotyped and repetitive use of language , and persistent preoccupation with unusual objects .
the disturbance must not be better accounted for by rett syndrome , intellectual disability or global developmental delay .
icd-10 uses the same definition .
there are many different diagnostic tools .
two are commonly used in autism research : the autism diagnostic interview-revisedtify adi-r foley is a semi-parent interview , and the autism diagnostic observation schedule .
the scale scale across the spectrum is used to measure autism based on observation of children .
the diagnostic interview for social and communication disorders disorders disorders disordershend discords may also be used .
a pediatrician is a person who performs a preliminary investigation by taking developmental history and physically examining the child .
if warranted , diagnosis and evaluations are conducted with help from asd specialists , observing and assessing cognitive , communication , family , and other factors using standardized tools , and taking into account any related medical conditions .
a pediatric neuropsychologist is often asked to assess behavior and cognitive skills , both to help diagnosis and to help recommend educational interventions .
a differential diagnosis might also include intellectual disability , hearing impairment , and a specific language impairment such as landau – kleffner syndrome .
this can make it harder to diagnose psychiatric disorders like depression .
clinical genetics evaluations are often done once asd is diagnosed , particularly when other symptoms suggest a genetic cause .
however , there are some guidelines in the us and uk that can be limited to high-resolution chromosome and fragile x testing .
a genotype-first model of diagnosis has been proposed , which would routinely assess the genome 's copy number variations .
new genetic tests are developed several ethical , legal , and social issues .
testing may be given before adequate understanding of how to use test results .
metabolic and neuroimaging tests are helpful , but are not routine .
asd can sometimes be diagnosed by age 14 months , although diagnosis becomes increasingly stable over the first three years of life : for example , a one-year-old who meets criteria for asd is less likely to get a few years old to continue to do so a few years later .
in the united kingdom , the national autism plan for children recommends at most 30 weeks from first concern to completed diagnosis and assessment , though few cases are handled that quickly in practice .
in some places , they may try to help their employers make changes , or to get disability living allowances or other benefits .
girls are diagnosed later than males .
underdiagnosis and overdiagnosis are problems in marginal cases .
the increasing popularity of drug treatment options and the expansion of benefits has given providers incentives to diagnose asd , resulting in some overdiagnosis of children with uncertain symptoms .
the cost of screening and diagnosis can not be diagnosed .
it is difficult to diagnose autism among the visually impaired .
autism is one of the five pervasive developmental disorders .
these symptoms can cause sickness , fragility , or emotional disturbance .
of the five pdd forms , asperger syndrome is closest to autism in signs and likely causes .
unlike autism , people with asperger syndrome have no longer delay in language development .
autism , asperger syndrome and pdd-nos often call them the " autism spectrum disorders " .
in this article , autism is the most common autistic disorder .
asd , in turn , is a subset of the broader autism phenotype .
the forms of autism cover a wide spectrum .
because the behavior spectrum is continuous , boundaries between diagnostic categories are always somewhat arbitrary .
sometimes the syndrome is divided into low-, medium-or high-functioning autism hideouts , based on iq thresholds , or on how much support the individual requires in daily life .
autism can be divided into syndromal and non-syndromal autism .
although individuals with asperger syndrome tend to perform better cognitively than those with autism , the overlap between asperger syndrome , hfa , and non-syndromal autism is unclear .
some studies have reported diagnoses of autism in children due to a loss of language or social skills .
the validity of this difference is controversial .
research into causes has been hampered by the inability to identify biologically meaningful subgroups within the autistic population and by the traditional boundaries between psychiatry , psychology , neurology and pediatrics .
newer technologies such as fmri and diffusion tensor imaging can help identify biologically relevant phenotypesractive traits which can be viewed on brain scans , to help further studies of autism .
it has been proposed to classify autism using genetics as well as behavior .
about half of parents of children with asd notice their unusual behavior by 18 months , and about 4-fifths notice by age 24 months .
according to an article , failure to meet any of the following milestones " is an absolute indication to proceed with further evaluations .
delay in referral for such testing may delay early diagnosis and treatment and affect the long term outcome .
the united states preventive services task force -lrb- 2016 -rrb- found it was unclear if screening was beneficial or harmful among children in whom there is no concerns .
the japanese practice is to screen all children for asd at 18 and 24 months , using autism-specific formal screening tests .
in the uk , children whose families or doctors recognize possible signs of autism are shown .
it is not known which approach is more effective .
screening tools include the modified checklist for autism in toddlershora chaturation , the early screening of autistic traits questionnaire , and the first year inventory ; initial data on m-chat and its predecessor , the checklist for autism in toddlers chat ; on children aged 18 – 30 months suggests that it is best used in a few good-positive setting and that it has many false falsegnignignignignignignignignignignists .
it may be more accurate to precede these tests with a broadband screener that does not distinguish asd from other developmental disorders .
screening tools designed for one culture 's norms for behaviors like eye contact may be inappropriate for a different culture .
although genetic screening for autism is generally unractical , it can be considered in some cases , such as children with neurological symptoms and dysmorphic features .
while infection with rubella during pregnancy causes less than 1 % of cases of autism , vaccination against rubella can prevent many of those cases .
the main goals are to reduce deficits and family distress .
iqs are correlated with greater responsiveness to treatment and improved treatment results .
no single treatment is best .
families and the educational system are the main things for treatment .
services should be carried out by behavior analysts , special education teachers , speech pathologists , and licensed psychologists .
studies of interventions have shown that effective effective effective effective effective effective effective effective effective effective effective effective effective methods are not effective .
however , the development of evidence-based interventions has advanced in recent years .
although many psychosocial interventions have some positive evidence , suggests that some form of treatment is preferable to no treatment , the methodological quality of systematic reviews of these studies has been poor , and there is little evidence for the relative effectiveness of treatment options .
intensive , sustained special education programs and behavior therapy early in life can help children get self-care , communication , and job skills .
while medications have not been found to help with core symptoms , they may be used for associated symptoms , such as irritability , inattention , or repetitive behavior patterns .
these include : aba aba aba aba aba aba aba aba aba abaxton , developmental models , structured teaching , speech and language therapy , social skills therapy , and occupational therapy .
among these approaches , interventions either treat autistic features comprehensively , or focalize treatment on a specific area of deficit .
the quality of research for early intensive behavioral interventionnity eibi independently is a treatment procedure using over thirty hours per week of the structured type of aba that is carried out with very young children – is currently low , and more vigorous research designs with larger sample sizes are needed .
two theoretical frameworks outlined for early childhood intervention include structured and naturalistic aba interventions , and developmental social pragmatic models bethel dsp pmid .
one interventional strategy uses a parent training model .
many dsp programs have been made to explicitly deliver intervention systems through at-home parent implementation .
despite the recent development of parent training models , these interventions have shown effectiveness in numerous studies .
early , intensive aba therapy has demonstrated effectiveness in increasing communication , as well as adaptive and global functioning in preschool children .
there is less evidence in its treatment of global symptoms .
neuropsychological reports are often poorly communicated to educators .
treatment programs may lead to significant improvements after the children grow up .
the appropriateness of including children with varying severity of autism spectrum disorders in the general education population is a subject of current debate among educators and researchers .
medications may be used to treat asd symptoms that interfere with integrating a child into home or school when behavioral treatment fails .
they may also be used for people with anxiety .
more than half of us children diagnosed with asd are prescribed as drugs or anticonvulsants .
the antipsychotic drugs risperidone and aripiprazole are fda-approved for treating aggressive and self-injurious behaviors .
people with autism may respond atypically .
side effects , for example , may include weight gain , tiredness , and aggression .
the stimulant medication methylphenidate is beneficial for some children with co-morbidness or hyperactivity .
there is a great deal of research about the safety of drug treatments for adolescents and adults with asd .
no medication relieves autism 's main symptoms of social and communication problems .
experiments in mice have reversed or reduced some symptoms related to autism by replacing or modulating gene function .
there are many alternative therapy treatments and interventions .
many programs focus on success measures that lack predictive validity and real-world relevance .
some people may choose to put the baby at risk .
children with autism have for unconventional foods can lead to reduction in bone cortical thickness .
in 2005 , a chelation therapy killed a five-year-old child with autism .
chelation is not recommended for people with asd .
another alternative medicine practice with no evidence is stop treatment , a mixture of homeopathy , supplements , and ' vaccine detoxing ' .
there is no evidence to recommend a gluten-and casein-free diet as a standard treatment .
a 2018 review concluded that it may be a therapeutic option for specific groups of children with autism , such as those with known food intolerance or with food intolerance markers .
the authors analyzed the prospective trials conducted to date that studied the efficacy of the gluten-and casein-free diet in children with asd <unk> 4 in total combinations .
all of them compared gluten-and casein-free diet with a control group .
in two of the studies , whose duration was 12 and 24 months , a significant improvement in asd symptomstify effectiveness rate 50 % gundam was identified .
in the other two studies , whose duration was 3 months , no significant effect was observed .
the authors concluded that a longer duration of the diet may be necessary to achieve the improvement of the asd symptoms .
other problems in the trials carried out include transgressions of the diet , small sample size , the heterogeneity of the participants and the possibility of a placebo effect .
in the subset of people who have gluten sensitivity there is limited evidence that a gluten-free diet may improve some autistic behaviors .
music therapy may improve social interaction , verbal communication , and non-verbal communication skills .
there has been research about hyperbaric treatments in children with autism .
there is no known cure .
children recover occasionally , so that they lose their diagnosis of asd .
it is not known how often recovery happens .
most children with autism learn language by age five or younger .
most children with autism lack social support , meaningful relationships , future employment opportunities or self-determination .
although core difficulties tend to persist , symptoms often become less severe with age .
few studies have shown that long-term prognosis can be used .
some adults show modest improvement in communication skills , but a few decline .
acquiring language before age six , having an iq above 50 , and having a marketable skill all predict better outcomes .
many people with autism are affected by changes of life .
people with autism are more likely to be unemployed .
about half of people in their twenties with autism are not employed .
most recent reviews tend to estimate a prevalence of 1-2 per 1,000 for autism and close to 6 per 1,000 children in the united states for asd 2008 .
asperger syndrome affects 37.2 million people in the world .
in 2012 , the nhs estimated that the overall prevalence of autism in adults aged 18 years and over in the uk was 1.1 % .
rates of pdd-nos 's have been estimated at approximately 0.6 per 1,000 , and childhood disintegrative disorder at 0.02 per 1,000 .
in 2010 , about 1 out of every 68 children submitted 1.5 % coins coins .
the number of reported cases of autism increased dramatically in the 1990s and early 2000s .
this increase is largely attributable to changes in diagnostic practices , referral patterns , availability of services , age at diagnosis , and public awareness .
the available evidence does not say that autism 's true prevalence has increased .
boys are at higher risk than girls .
the sex ratio averages 4.3 : 1 and is greatly modified by cognitive impairment : it may be close to 2 : 1 with intellectual disability and more than 5 : 5 : 1 without .
there are several theories about the higher prevalence in males .
the evidence does not say that the risk of autism is related to either parent , and with diabetes , bleeding , and use of psychiatric drugs in the mother during pregnancy .
the risk is greater with older fathers than with older mothers .
most people believe that race , ethnicity , and socio-economic background do not affect the occurrence of autism .
there are many other conditions for children with autism .
a few examples of autistic symptoms and treatments were described long before autism was named .
the table talk of martin luther , written by his notetaker , mathesius , contains the story of a 12-year-old boy who may have been severely autistic .
luther reportedly thought the boy was a soulless mass of flesh possessed by the devil , and suggested that he be suffocated .
the earliest well-documented case of autism is that of hugh blair of borgue .
the wild boy of aveyron , a feral child caught in 1798 , showed several signs of autism .
the term " autism " was coined by the swiss psychiatrist eugen bleuler in 1910 .
he derived it from the greek word " autos " — meaning self-admiration , and used it to mean morbid self-admiration .
grunya sukhareva described similar syndrome in 1925 .
the word " autism " first came from the vienna university hospital in 1938 .
asperger was investigating an asd now known asperger syndrome , though for various reasons it was not widely recognized as a separate diagnosis until 1981 .
leo kanner of the johns hopkins hospital first used " autism " in its modern sense in english when he introduced the label " early infantile autism " in 1943 .
there are many characteristics of this problem , including " autistic aloneness " and " insistence on sameness " .
it is not known whether kanner developed the term independently of asperger .
donald triplett was the first person to be diagnosed with autism .
he was diagnosed by kanner in 1938 .
triplett was noted for his savant abilities , particularly being able to name musical notes played on a piano and to mentally multiply numbers .
his father , oliver , said he was socially withdrawn .
by age 2 , he had the ability to recite the 23rd psalm and memorized 25 questions and answers from the presbyterian catechism .
he also liked making musical chords .
kanner 's reuse of " autism " led to decades of confused terminology like " infantile schizophrenia " .
starting in the late 1960s autism was a separate syndrome .
as late as the mid-1970s there was little evidence of a genetic role in autism .
parents continue to feel social stigma in situations where their child 's autistic behavior is perceived negatively , and many primary care physicians and medical specialists express some consistent with outdated autism research .
it took until 1980 for the dsm-iii to tell different autism from childhood schizophrenia .
in 1987 , the dsm-iii-r gave a checklist for diagnosing autism .
in may 2013 , the dsm-5 was released .
the grouping of disorders , including pdd-nos , autism , asperger syndrome , rett syndrome , and cdd , has been removed and replaced with the general term of autism spectrum disorders .
there are two categories : impaired social communication and / or interaction , and restricted and / or repetitive behaviors .
the internet has helped autistic individuals bypass nonverbal cues and emotional sharing that they find difficult to deal with .
some people in the community seek a cure , while others believe that autism is just another way of being .
autistic culture has developed .
it is held every year at the same time as world autism awareness day , autism day , autistic pride day , autreat , and others .
organizations that promote awareness of autism are autism speaks , autism national committee , and autism society of america .
people who study autism are trying to learn more about " autism as a culture , transcultural comparisons . . . and research on social movements . "
most autistic individuals do not have savant skills .
the autism rights movement is a social movement in the context of disability rights .
the autism rights movement advocates for including greater acceptance of autistic behaviors .
autism rights are a group of people who believe that the autism spectrum is genetic .
the medical perspective is different from two other likewise distinct views : the medical perspective , that autism is caused by a genetic defect and should be addressed by targeting the autism gene bethel s aarhus , and fringe theories that autism is caused by environmental factors such as vaccines .
a common criticism against autistic activists is that the majority of them are " high-functioning " or have asperger syndrome .
one-third of those with graduate degrees may be unemployed .
autistics who find work work work , most are employed in sheltered settings working for wages below the national minimum .
employers state hiring concerns about productivity and supervision .
a majority of the economic burden of autism if caused by decreased earnings in the job market .
some studies also find decreased earning among parents who care for autistic children .
