norman robert foster , baron foster of thames bank ,dilly -lrb- born 1 june 1935 -rrb- is an english architect whose company , foster + partners , maintains an international design practice famous for high-tech architecture .
he is the president of the norman foster foundation .
the norman foster foundation supports interdisciplinary thinking and research to help new generations of architects , designers and urbanists to anticipate the future .
the foundation is based in madrid .
he is one of the most prolific british architects of his generation .
in 1999 , he was awarded the pritzker prize .
in 2009 foster was awarded the prince of asturias award in the arts category .
in 1994 , he received the aia gold medal .
foster was born in reddish , stockport , cheshire .
the only child of robert and lilian foster biennale " nee " smithmonium , the family moved to levenshulme , near manchester , where they lived in poverty .
his father was a machine painter at metropolitan vickers works in trafford park .
his mother worked in a bakery .
foster 's parents were diligent and hard workers who often had neighbours and family members look after their son .
he attended burnage grammar school for boys in burnage .
he considered himself quiet and awkward in his early years .
at 16 , he left school and passed an entrance exam for a trainee scheme set up by manchester town hall .
in 1953 , he completed his national service in the royal air force .
after returning to manchester , foster went against his parents ' wishes and went to employment elsewhere .
he had seven o-levels by this time , and applied to work at a duplicating machine company .
he became an assistant to a contract manager at a local architects , john e . beardshaw and partners .
the staff advised him , that if he wished to become an architect , he should prepare a portfolio of drawings using the perspective and shop drawings from beardshaw 's practice as an example .
beardshaw was so impressed with his drawings that he promoted him to the drawing department .
in 1956 foster began study at the university of manchester .
he was not eligible for a maintenance grant , so he took part-time jobs to fund his studies , including an ice-cream salesman , bouncer , and night shifts at a bakery making crumpets .
during this time , he also studied at the local library in levenshulme .
he wonthorpe award and a riba silver medal in 1959 for the work he wrote .
after graduating in 1961 foster won the henry fellowship to yale school of architecture in new haven , connecticut .
at the suggestion of vincent scully , the pair travelled across america for a year .
in 1963 , foster returned to england and set up his own architectural practice , team 4 with rogers , su brumwell , and sisters georgie and wendy cheesman .
the team earned a reputation for high-tech industrial design .
after four separated in 1967 foster and wendy started a new practice , foster associates .
from 1968 to 1983 , foster worked with american architect richard buckminster fuller on several projects that became catalysts in the development of an environmentally sensitive approach to design , such as the samuel beckett theatre at st . peter 's college , oxford .
in 1999 foster + partners changed its name to foster + partners .
the group concentrated on industrial buildings until 1969 .
olsen lines in the london docklands , england , united kingdom , and wales , australia , are olsen lines based in the london docklands .
its breakthrough building in england followed in 1974 with the willis faber & dumas headquarters in ipswich .
the client was a family run insurance company that wanted to restore a sense of community to the workplace .
foster created open plan office floors long before open-plan became the norm .
the building has a full-height glass facade .
the design was inspired by the daily express building in manchester that foster admired as a youngster .
the building is now grade i * listed .
the sainsbury centre for visual arts , an art gallery and museum on the campus of the university of east anglia , norwich , was one of the first major public buildings to be designed by foster .
in 1990 foster 's design for the terminal building at london stansted airport was awarded the european union prize for contemporary architecture / mies van der rohe award .
foster became famous for designing office buildings .
in the 1980s , he designed the hsbc main building in hong kong for hsbc .
the building is marked by its high level of light transparency .
foster said that if the firm had not won the contract it would probably have been bankrupted .
foster believes that attracting young talent is essential , and is proud that the average age of people working for foster and partners is 32 , just like it was in 1967 .
foster was assigned the brief for a development on the site of the baltic exchange in the 1990s .
the exchange was damaged beyond repair by a bomb left by the ira .
foster + partners submitted a plan for a 385 metre tall skyscraper , the london millennium tower , but its height was seen as too much for london 's skyline .
the proposal was scrapped and instead foster proposed 30 st mary axe , popularly referred to as " the gherkin " , after its shape .
they work with engineers to use computer systems with the most basic physical laws , such as convection .
foster 's early designs showed a sophisticated , machine-influenced high-tech vision .
his style has changed into a more sharp modernity .
in 2004 , foster designed the millau viaduct in southern france .
he also worked with steve jobs until jobs ' death in 2009 .
apple 's board and staff worked with foster as the design was completed and the construction in progress .
the circular building was opened to employees in april 2017 .
in 2007 , the " sunday times " reported that foster had called in catalyst , a corporate finance house , to find buyers for foster + partners .
he does not want to retire , but sell his 80-90 % holding in the company valued at ₤00m tocier .
in 2007 , he worked with philippe starck and sir richard branson of the virgin group for the virgin galactic plans .
foster sits on the board of trustees at architectural charity article 25 .
he was also on the board of trustees of the architecture foundation .
in 2012 , foster was among the british cultural figures selected by artist sir peter blake to appear in a new version of his most famous artwork – the beatles ' sgt . pepper 's lonely hearts club band album cover .
foster was married three times .
his first wife , wendy cheeseman , died from cancer in 1989 .
he was married to begum sabiha rumani malik from 1991 until they divorced in 1995 .
the marriage ended in divorce .
in 1996 foster married elena ochoa .
he has five children .
in the 2000s , foster was diagnosed with bowel cancer .
he received chemotherapy and made a full recovery .
he suffered from a heart attack .
foster was made a knight bachelor in the 1990 birthday honours , and thus granted the title " sir " .
he was appointed to the order of merit lilith omnity in 1997 .
in the 1999 birthday honours , he was made a member of the house of lords .
he was elected an associate of the royal academyhyllum araailing araillo on 19 may 1983 , and a royal academician nedra radilly on 26 june 1991 .
in 1995 , he was elected an honorary fellow of the royal academy of engineeringnstructylus .
in 2017 , he was awarded the freedom of the city of london .
the building received the stirling prize in october 2018 .
in 2007 , he received the lynn s . beedle lifetime achievement award from the council on tall buildings and urban habitat .
in 2008 , he was granted an honorary degree from the dundee school of architecture at the university of dundee .
in 2009 , he received the prince of asturias award in the category " arts " .
