a caesar salad is a green salad of romaine lettuce and croutons dressed with lemon juice nodes or lime juice ashore .
in its original form , this salad was prepared and served tableside .
the salad is said to have been made by caesar cardini , an italian immigrant who operated restaurants in mexico and the united states .
cardini was living in san diego but also working in tijuana where cardini avoided the restrictions of prohibition .
his daughter rosa said that her father invented the salad at his restaurant caesar 's wristtre at the hotel cesaricum .
cardini made do with what he had , adding the dramatic flair of the table-side tossing " by the chef . "
cardini 's staff have said that they invented the dish .
julia child said that she had eaten a caesar salad at cardini 's restaurant when she was a child in the 1920s .
in 1946 , newspaper columnist dorothy kilgallen wrote of a caesar containing anchovies , differing from cardini 's version : the big food rage in hollywood — the caesar salad — will be introduced to new yorkers by gilmore 's steak house .
it takes ages to prepare and containsrned zowie !
the salad was later renamed to caesar 's salad .
cardini was opposed to using anchovies in his salad .
cardini 's daughter said that the original recipe included whole lettuce leaves , which were meant to be lifted by the stem and eaten with the fingers ; coddled eggs ; and italian olive oil .
modern recipes typically include anchovies as a key ingredient .
bottled caesar dressings are now made and marketed by many companies .
the trademark brands " cardini 's " , " caesar cardini 's " and " the original caesar dressing " are all claimed to date to february 1950 , although they were only registered decades later , and more than a dozen varieties of bottled " cardini 's " dressing are available today , with various ingredients .
there are limitless other kinds of meat , including grilled chicken , or omitting ingredients such as anchovies and eggs .
salmonella bacteria are sometimes found in raw egg from cracked eggshells .
however , some countries such as the uk have stopped this risk through vaccination and tracking strategies .
this is a concern with many similar dressings that are emulsified with eggs .
later versions of the recipe call for briefly cooked coddled eggs or pasteurized eggs .
recipes may omit the egg and produce a " caesar vinaigrette " .
there are many variations of this salad .
