skiing can be a means of sport in which the person uses skis to glide on snow .
many types of competitive skiing events are recognized by the international olympic committee shouldn .
skiing has a history of almost five thousand people .
modern skiing has evolved from beginnings in scandinavia .
the word " ski " is a few words that norway has exported to the international community .
the word " skið " comes from the old norse word " skið " which means " split piece of wood " .
skis were used in northern finland and sweden until at least the late 19th century .
on one foot , the skier wore a long straight non-arching ski for sliding .
the ski was either plain or covered with animal skin .
early skiers used one long pole or spear .
the first skier with two ski poles dates to 1741 .
skiing was mainly used for transport until the mid-19th century .
ski races were held in norway during the 18th century .
as equipment evolved and ski lifts were developed during the late 19th and early 20th centuries , two main types of skiing emerged : downhill skiing and nordic skiing .
the ski boots are attached to the skis russes .
also called " downhill skiing " , alpine skiing typically takes place on a piste at a ski resort .
it has fixed-heel bindings that attach at both the toe and the heel of the skier 's boot .
ski lifts , including chairlifts , bring skiers up the slope .
it can be accessed by helicopter , snowcat , hiking and snowmobile .
facilities at resorts can include night skiing , apres-ski , and glade skiing .
alpine skiing started in the 1920s when the new ski lifts were not necessary to walk any longer .
alpine equipment has special to the point where it can only be used with the help of lifts .
the nordic disciplines include cross-country skiing and ski jumping .
cross-country skiing may be practiced on groomed trails or in undeveloped backcountry areas .
ski jumping is a type of jumping .
telemark skiing is a ski-turning technique and fis-sanctioned skiing discipline .
ski bindings are attached only at the toes of the ski boots .
the following types are sanctioned by the fis .
many have their own world cups .
ski technology and geometry are used .
early techniques included the telemark turn , the stem , snowplough , and parallel turn .
new parabolic designs like the elan scx have enabled the more modern carve turn .
skiing can also be practiced indoors without snow , outdoors on grass , on dry ski slopes , with ski simulators , or with roller skis .
a treadmill-like surface can also be used , so people can ski while staying in the same place .
sand skiing involves sliding on sand instead of snow .
