a water turbine is a rotary engine that uses kinetic energy and potential energy from moving water into mechanical work .
water turbines were developed in the 19th century and were widely used for industrial power prior to electrical grids .
they are mostly used for electric power generation .
water turbines are mostly dams to generate electricity from the kinetic energy of the water .
water wheels have been used for hundreds of years for industrial power .
their main shortcoming is size , which limits the flow rate and head that can be used .
the migration from water wheels to modern turbines took about one hundred years .
the industrial revolution developed a lot during the industrial revolution .
they also made extensive use of new materials and manufacturing methods developed at the time .
the word turbine came from the greek word " τυρβη " for " whirling " or a " vortex " .
the water is a swirl component of the water which passes energy to a spinning rotor .
this extra part of motion allowed the turbine to be smaller than a waterwheel of the same power .
they could process more water by spinning faster and could use much greater heads .
impulse turbines were developed which didn ’ t use swirl .
the earliest known water turbines date back to the roman empire .
two helix-turbine mill sites of almost identical design were found at chemtou and testour , modern-day tunisia , dating to the late 3rd or early 4th century ad .
the waterwheel with angled blades was installed at the bottom of a water-filled , circular shaft .
the water from the mill-race entered the pit tangentially , creating a swirling water column which made the fully submerged wheel act like a true turbine .
fausto veranzio in his book " machinae novae " protested 1595 bc .
johann segner developed a reactive water turbinewheel in the mid-18th century in kingdom of hungary .
it had a horizontal axis .
it is a very simple machine that is still made today for use in small hydro sites .
segner worked with euler on some of the early mathematical theories of turbine design .
in the 18th century , a dr . robert barker invented a similar reaction hydraulic turbine that became popular as a lecture-hall demonstration .
the only known example of this type of engine used in power production dates from 1851 .
in 1820 , jean-victor poncelet created an inward-flow turbine .
in 1826 benoit fourneyron developed an outward-flow turbine .
this was an efficient machine recovered .
the stationary outlet also had curved guides .
in 1844 uriah a . boyden developed an outward flow turbine that improved on the performance of the fourneyron turbine .
its runner shape was similar to that of a francis turbine .
in 1849 , james b . francis improved the inward flow reaction turbine to over 90 % efficiency .
he also conducted sophisticated tests and developed engineering methods for water turbine design .
the francis turbine is the first modern water turbine .
it is still the most used water turbine in the world today .
the francis turbine is also called a " radial flow turbine " .
all modern reaction water turbines are of this design .
as the water swirls inwards , it accelerates , and transfers energy to the runner .
water pressure decreases to the atmospheric , or in some cases subatmospheric , as the water passes through the turbine blades and loses energy .
around 1890 , the modern fluid bearing was invented .
as of 2002 , fluid bearings seem to have a mean time between failures of more than 1300 years .
around 1913 , the kaplan turbine was a propeller-type machine .
it was an evolution of the francis turbine and revolutionized the ability to develop low-head hydro sites .
all common water machines until the late 19th century cupping including water wheels wheels were basically reaction machines ; water " pressure " head acted on the machine and produced work .
a reaction turbine needs to fully hold the water during energy transfer .
in 1866 , california millwright samuel knight invented a machine that took the impulse system to a new level .
it was inspired by the high pressure jet systems used in hydraulic mining in the gold fields .
this is called an impulse .
the water 's velocity , about twice the velocity of the bucket periphery , does a u-turn in the bucket and drops out of the runner at low velocity .
in 1879 , lester pelton , experimenting with a knight wheel , developed a pelton wheel opener double bucket design .
in about 1895 , william doble improved on pelton 's half-cylindrical bucket form with an elliptical bucket that included a cut in it to allow the jet a cleaner bucket entry .
this is the modern form of the pelton turbine .
although doble took over the pelton company he did not change the name to doble because it had brand name recognition .
turgo and crossflow turbines were later impulse designs .
water is directed on to the blades of a turbine runner , creating a force on the blades .
the force acts through a distanceachal force acting through a distance is the definition of workfully .
in this way , energy is changed from the water flow to the turbine .
water turbines are divided into two groups : reaction turbines and impulse turbines .
the precise shape of water turbine blades is a function of the supply pressure of water , and the type of impeller selected .
reaction turbines are acted on by water , which changes pressure as it moves through the turbine and gives up its energy .
they must be encased to contain the water pressurericted or they must be fully submerged in the water flow .
newton 's third law describes the transfer of energy for reaction turbines .
most water turbines in use are reaction turbines .
in reaction turbine pressure drops in both fixed and moving blades .
it is used in dam and large power plants .
impulse turbines change the velocity of a water jet .
the jet pushes the turbine 's curved blades which change the direction of the flow .
the resulting change in momentum callahan callahan impulse !
the force acts through a distancemonium workfully and the diverted water flow is left with diminished energy .
an impulse turbine is a flow in which the fluid flows over the rotor blades .
before hitting the turbine blades , the water 's pressure reflects potential energy is changed to kinetic energy by a nozzle and focused on the turbine .
no pressure change occurs at the turbine blades , and the turbine does not require a housing for operation .
newton 's second law describes the transfer of energy for impulse turbines .
impulse turbines are often used in very highttered > 300m / 1000 ft ) head applications .
the power available in a stream of water is
some water turbines are designed for pumped storage hydroelectricity .
they can reverse flow and operate as a pump to fill a high reservoir during off-peak electrical hours .
this type of turbine is usually a deriaz turbine in design .
this type of system is used in el hierro , one of the canary islands .
the lower reservoir holds 150,000 cubic meters of water .
the stored water is a constant battery .
the maximum storage capacity is 270 megawataning .
when demand rises and there is not enough wind power , the water will be released to four hydroelectric turbines with a total capacity of 11 mw .
large modern water turbines operate at mechanical efficiencies greater than 90 % .
turbine selection is based on the available water head , and less so on the available flow rate .
in general , impulse turbines are used for high head sites , and reaction turbines are used for low head sites .
kaplan turbines with adjustable blade pitch are well adapted to wide ranges of flow or head conditions .
small turbinesltaltaltaltaltaltaltaltaltaltaltaltaltaltaltaltaltaltaltaltaltaltaltany may have horizontal shafts , and even fairly large bulb-type turbines up to 100 mw or so may be horizontal .
very large francis and kaplan machines usually have vertical shafts because this makes best use of the available head .
pelton wheels may be either vertical or horizontal shaft machines .
some impulse turbines use multiple jets per runner to balance shaft thrust .
this also allows for the use of a smaller turbine runner , which can decrease costs and mechanical losses .
the speed formula _ 1 of a turbine characterizes the turbine 's shape in a way that is not related to its size .
this allows a new turbine design to be scaled from an existing design of known performance .
the specific speed is also the main criteria for matching a specific hydro site with the correct turbine type .
the specific speed is the speed that the turbine turns for a particular discharge point .
affinity laws allow the output of a turbine to be predicted based on model tests .
a miniature replica of a proposed design , about one footttered 0.3 m diameter in diameter , can be tested and the laboratory measurements applied to the final application with high confidence .
affinity laws are made by requiring similitude between the test model and the application .
flow through the turbine is controlled either by a large valve or by wicket gates arranged around the outside of the turbine runner .
differential head and flow can be used for a number of different values of gate opening , producing a hill diagram used to show how the turbine works .
the runaway speed of a water turbine is its speed at full flow , and no shaft load .
the turbine will be designed to survive the mechanical forces of this speed .
the manufacturer will supply the runaway speed rating .
different designs of governors have been used since the mid-18th century to control the speeds of the water turbines .
a variety of flyball systems , or first-generation governors , were used during the first 100 years of water turbine speed controls .
in early flyball systems , the flyball component countered by a spring acted directly to the valve of the turbine or the wicket gate to control the amount of water that enters the turbines .
the system with mechanical governors started around 1880 .
an early mechanical governor is a servomechanism .
the mechanical governors were continued to be enhanced in power amplification by the use of gears and the dynamic behavior .
by 1930 , the mechanical governors had many parameters that could be set on the feedback system for precise controls .
in the later part of the twentieth century , electronic governors and digital systems started to replace the mechanical governors .
in the electronic governors , also known as second-generation governors , the flyball was replaced by rotational speed sensor but the controls are still done through analog systems .
in the modern systems , the controls are performed by algorithms that are programmed to the computer of the governor .
given that the turbine blades in a water turbine are constantly exposed to water and dynamic forces , they need to have high corrosion and strength .
the most common material used in overlays on carbon steel runners in water turbines are austenitic steel alloys .
the chromium content in these steel alloys is more than 12 % chromium needed to show some atmospheric corrosion .
this allows for a much longer lifespan of the turbine blades .
the blades are made of stainless steels .
besides corrosion and strength as the criteria for material selection , weld-ability and density of the turbine blade .
greater weld-ability allows for easier repair of the turbine blades .
this also allows for higher quality which results in a better repair .
choosing a material with low density is important to achieve higher efficiency because the lighter blades rotate more easily .
the most common material used in kaplan turbine blades are stainless steel alloys .
the martensitic stainless steel alloys have high strength , thinner sections than standard carbon steel .
the ssitt 13cr-4nitary has been shown to have improved erosion at all angles of attack through the process of laser hardening .
erosion also affects the hydraulic profile of the blades which reduces the relative ease to rotate .
turbines are designed to run for decades with very little maintenance of the main elements .
maintenance of the runners and parts exposed to water include removal , inspection , and repair of worn parts .
normal wear and tear includes pitting corrosion from cavitation , fatigue cracking , and abrasion from suspended solids in the water .
steel elements are repaired by welding , usually with stainless steel rod .
damaged areas are cut or ground out , then welding back up to their original or an improved profile .
old turbine runners may have a significant amount of stainless steel added this way by the end of their lifetime .
the welding process is used to achieve the highest quality of repairs .
other things that need inspection and repair during overhauls include bearings , packing box and shaft sleeves , servomotors , cooling systems for the bearings and generator coils , seal rings , wicket gate links and all surfaces .
water turbines are generally considered a clean power producer .
they use a renewable energy source .
they produce significant amounts of the world 's electrical supply .
historically there have also been negative consequences .
dams alter the natural ecology of rivers , potentially killing fish , stopping migrations , and disrupting peoples ' livelihoods .
for example , native american tribes in the pacific northwest built livelihoods around salmon fishing , but aggressive dam-building destroyed their way of life .
dams also cause less obvious , but potentially serious consequences .
in the united states , it is now illegal to block the migration of fish , for example the white sturgeon in north america .
