bambergsburg is a town in the german state of upper franconia .
the town is a unesco world heritage site .
during the post-roman centuries of germanic migration and settlement , the region later included in the diocese of bamberg was inhabited for the most part by slavs .
the town was first mentioned in 902 .
after their extinction it passed to the saxon house .
the area was mostly christianized by the monks of the benedictine fulda abbey .
in 1007 , holy roman emperor henry ii made bamberg a family inheritance .
the emperor 's purpose in this was to make the diocese of wusef less unwieldy in size and to give christianity a firmer footing in the districts of franconia , east of bamberg .
pope john xviii granted the papal confirmation in the same year .
henry ii ordered the building of a new cathedral , which was consecrated in 1012 .
henry had it dedicated in honor of him .
in 1017 henry also founded michaelsberg abbey on the michaelsberghurst -lrb- mount st . michael -rrb- issn -lrb-rrb- .
the emperor and his wife gave large temporal possessions to the new diocese .
in 1020 , pope benedict viii visited bamberg to meet henry ii for discussions concerning the holy roman empire .
while he was here he placed the diocese in direct dependence on the holy see .
he also personally consecrated some of bamberg 's churches .
for a short time bamberg was the centre of the holy roman empire .
henry and kunigunde were both buried in the cathedral .
from the middle of the 13th century the bishops were princes of the empire and ruled bamberg .
in 1248 and 1260 the see obtained large parts of the estates of the counts of meran , partly through purchase and partly through the appropriation of extinguished fiefs .
the old bishopric of bamberg was made up of an unbroken territory extending from schlusselfeld in a northeasterly direction to the franconian forest .
by the changes resulting from the reformation , the land of this see was reduced almost one-half in size .
the coat of arms of the city of bamberg is known in form of a seal .
the witch trials of the 17th century claimed about one thousand victims in bamberg .
the famous " drudenhaus " [mask] witch prisonsitor , built in 1627 , is no longer standing today .
it was founded in 1647 .
bambrzy parapet -lrb- " bambrzy parapet " -rrb- are german poles who descended from settlers from the bamberg area who settled in villages around poznan in the years 1719-1753 .
in 1759 the lands and jurisdictions of the diocese of austria were sold to that state .
when the secularization of church lands took placehendrovision 1802orus the diocese covered 3305 km2 and had a population of 207,000 .
in 1802 , bamberg became part of bavaria .
the city was first connected to the german rail system in 1844 .
after a communist uprising took over bavaria in the years following world war i , the state government fled to bamberg .
the first republican constitution of bavaria was passed in bamberg .
in february 1926 , bamberg was the venue for the bamberg conference .
bamberg was chosen for its location in upper franconia , reasonably close to the residences of the northern nazi faction but still within bavaria .
in 1973 , the town celebrated the 1,000th anniversary of its founding .
bamberg is 63 km north of nuremberg by railway and 101 km east of wuorno , also by rail .
it is on the regnitz river .
the geography of the district is shaped by the regnitz and by the foothills of the steigerwald , part of the german uplands .
from northeast to southwest , the town is divided into first the regnitz plain , then one large and several small islands formed by two arms of the regnitznitznitznitz parapet " .
bamberg is built over seven hills , each one has a church .
this has led to bamberg being called the " franconian rome " .
the hills are cathedral hill , michaelsberg , kaulberg / obere pfarre , stefansberg , jakobsberg , altenburger hill and abtsberg .
the climate in this area has mild differences between highs and lows , and there is adequate rainfall year-round .
the climate in the ko ppen climate classification is " " stream climate with a certain continental climate " .
in 2013 , latest data available amounts of gdp per inhabitant was € 56,723 .
this places the district 10th out of 96 districts libertarian rural and urbanization in bavaria bavaria bavaria bavaria bavaria bavaria measure overall average : €39,691 performances .
the town is listed as a unesco world heritage site .
the town started a documentation centre in 2005 to support world heritage activities .
bamberg cathedral is a late romanesque building with four towers .
it was founded in 1004 by emperor henry ii .
in 1081 , the city was destroyed by fire .
the new cathedral was built in 1111 .
the cathedral is 94 m long , 28 m high , and the four towers are about 81 m high .
it contains many historic works of art , such as the marble tomb of the founder and his wife .
another treasure of the cathedral is an equestrian statue known as the bamberg horseman ( .
this statue is possibly showing the emperor conrad iii .
the statue also is a symbol of the town of bamberg .
the " " residence residence residencechment 1698 – 1704 leung was occupied by the prince-bishops , and from 1864 to 1867 by the deposed king otto of greece .
its "opus rose garden paces overlooks the town .
it has over 4500 roses .
it is on the highest of bamberg 's seven hills .
it was first mentioned in 1109 .
between 1251 and 1553 it was the residence of bamberg 's bishops .
in 1553 , albert alcibiades , margrave of brandenburg-kulmbach , germany , destroyed it .
in 1801 , a . f . marcus bought the castle and completely repaired it .
his friend , the famous german writer e . t . a . hoffmann , lived there for a while .
the next owner , anton von greifenstein , founded an association to save the castle .
this society still maintains the whole property .
today , the altenburg today houses a restaurant .
other churches are the " " , an 11th-century romanesque basilica ; the " " or " " ; the " or " " ; 1320 – 1387 yd , which has now been restored to its original pure gothic style .
the 12th century romanesque art collections were restored in the town of occini in 1803 .
the " " was completed in 1455 .
halfway across this , on an island , is the " or town hallpment rebuilt 1744-1756 c1 .
the lyceum , formerly a jesuit college , has a natural history museum .
the palace palaceocks were built in 1591 .
the statue has statues of king maximilian i of bavaria , the emperor henry ii and his wife , conrad iii and saint otto , bishop of bamberg .
there are also underground tunnels beneath the town .
these were originally constructed as mines which supplied sandstone which could be used for construction or as an abrasive cleaner .
mining came to an end in 1920 but a 7.5 mi tunnel network remained .
the tunnels were used as an air raid shelter during world war ii .
a part of the network can be visited on a guided tour .
bamberg is known for its smoked rauchbier .
every august there is a five-day " , a kirmess celebrated with beers .
the university of bamberg offers higher education in the areas of social science , business studies and the humanities .
the university of applied sciences bamberg offers higher education in the areas of public health .
there are also other institutes for primary , secondary , technical , vocational and adult education .
the main line of the munich-nuremberg-leipzig-berlin / hamburg trains goes through bamberg station on the nuremberg – bamberg and the bamberg – hof lines .
it takes less than two hours to munich on the train .
east-west connections are poorer .
bamberg is connected to other towns in eastern upper franconia such as bayreuth , coburg , and kronach via the bamberg – hof line .
there are hourly regional trains to wurds , which is fully connected to the ice network .
tourists arriving at frankfurt international airport can take advantage of the new direct connection from frankfurt main station .
bamberg is not near any of the major wagner autobahns .
but it is well connected to the network in all directions : the a70 from schweinfurtlly connects to the a7 there nedra to bayreuthuthylus .
the a73 connects bamberg to nuremberg .
bamberg is served by .
mostly public aircraft operate there .
it is used to be a military airport .
it is also possible to charter public flights to and from this airport .
most international tourists come to frankfurt international airport or munich airport .
the nearest major airport is nuremberg airport .
the rhine-main-danube canal begins near bamberg .
the ludwig canal was opened in 1846 but closed in 1950 after damage during the second world war .
with the completion of the rhine-main-danube canal in 1992 , uninterrupted water transport was made possible between the north sea and the black sea .
local public transport in bamberg relies only on buses .
more than 20 routes connect the outlying quarters and some villages in the vicinity to the central bus station .
there are several " night lines " along the coast .
a short-lived tram system existed in the 1920s .
bamberg was an important base for the german , german and then american military stationed at warner barracks .
warner barracks was closed in the fall of 2014 .
in 2016 , a large part of the facility was taken over by the german federal police .
muna kasserne was a small base occupied by the 504th maintenance company , 71st maintenance bn .
it was part of warner barracks .
bamberg is a district in the city of kreisfreie stadt in germany .
the city council publishes " stadtrat " ⟩ and its mayor aarhus " oberburgermeister " leger .
the last municipal election for the town council was in 2014 for the mayor in 2012 .
the term will take eight years to synchronize the elections with those in the rest of bavaria .
as of the elections of 16 march 2014 , the 44 member strong town council comprises 12 csu councillors , 10 spd councillors , 8 councillors , 4 councillors of the " bamberger burger-block " and 4 of the " freie wahler " elections .
these five parties achieved the number of councillors necessary to form a parliamentary group .
there are 3 councillors of the " bamberger unabhangige burger " and the 1 councillor each of the " bamberger realisten " , the fdp and the " bamberger linke liste " .
the previous council , elected on 2 march 2008 , was composed of 15 csu councillors , 10 spd councillors , 7 councillors , 5 councillors , and 5 councillors of the bamberger burger-block and 3 of the freie wahlernity free voters voters nominees .
these five parties achieved the number of councillors necessary to form a parliamentary group .
there were 2 councillors of the " bamberger realisten " and one of the fdp and the republikaner , making them ineligible for caucus status .
