the other three fundamental forces are the strong interaction , the weak interaction , and gravitation .
at high energy the weak force and the force are combined as a single electroweak force .
the electromagnetic force is a measure of electromagnetic radiation that includes both electricity and magnetism as different forms of the same thing .
the electromagnetic force is important in determining the internal properties of most objects encountered in daily life .
the electromagnetic attraction between atomic nuclei and their orbital electrons holds atoms together .
there are many mathematical descriptions of the electromagnetic field .
in faraday 's law , magnetic fields are associated with electromagnetic induction and magnetism .
this led to the development of special relativity by albert einstein in 1905 .
originally , electricity and magnetism were two different types of forces .
as he was setting up his materials , he noticed a compass needle deflected away from magnetic north when the electric current from the battery was using was switched on and off .
this deflection convinced him that magnetic fields radiate from all sides of a wire carrying an electric current , just as light and heat do , and that it confirmed a direct relationship between electricity and magnetism .
soon after he found out that an electric current produces a magnetic field as it flows through a wire .
this unification was extended by michael faraday , and partially reformulated by oliver heaviside and heinrich hertz .
unlike the electromagnetic theory of that time , light and other electromagnetic waves are at present seen as taking the form of quantized , self-propagating oscillatory electromagnetic field disturbances called photons .
different frequencies of oscillation give rise to the different forms of electromagnetic radiation , from radio waves at the lowest frequencies , to visible light at the highest frequencies .
ørsted was the only person to examine the relationship between electricity and magnetism .
the factual setup of the experiment is not completely clear , so if current flowed across the needle or not .
it was largely overlooked by the contemporary scientific community .
the electromagnetic force is responsible for practically all phenomena one encounters in daily life above the nuclear scale , with the exception of gravity .
the electromagnetic force is made up of the nucleus of the atom .
this includes the forces we experience in " pushing " or " pulling " ordinary material objects , which result from the intermolecular forces that act between the individual molecules in our bodies and those in the objects .
the electromagnetic force is also involved in all forms of chemical phenomena .
a necessary part of understanding the intra-atomic and intermolecular forces is the effective force produced by the momentum of the electrons ' movement , such as electrons move between interacting atoms they carry momentum with them .
as a collection of electrons becomes more confined , their minimum momentum always increases due to the pauli exclusion principle .
matter at the molecular scale is determined by the balance between the electromagnetic force and the force generated by the exchange of momentum carried by the electrons themselves .
in 1600 , william gilbert proposed that electricity and magnetism , while both capable of causing attraction and repulsion of objects , were distinct effects .
the link between lightning and electricity was not confirmed until benjamin franklin 's proposed experiments in 1752 .
one of the first to find and publish a link between man-made electric current and magnetism was romagnosi , who in 1802 noticed that connecting a wire across a wire across a compass deflected a nearby compass needle .
however , the effect did not become widely known until 1820 , when ørsted performed a similar experiment .
ørsted 's work influenced ampere to produce a theory of electromagnetism that set the subject on a mathematical foundation .
the theory was developed by various physicists during the period between 1820 and 1873 .
in classical electromagnetism , the electromagnetic field is defined by a set of equations called maxwell 's equations .
albert einstein solved the problem with special relativity , which replaced classical kinematics with a new theory of kinematics .
in addition , relativity theory implies that in moving frames of reference , a magnetic field transforms to a field with a nonzero electric component .
the maxwell equations are linear , in that a change in the sources generate the currents increases in the fields .
nonlinear dynamics can occur when electromagnetic fields are made of matter .
this is studied , for example , in the subject of magnetohydrodynamics , which combines maxwell theory with the navier – stokes equations .
in the electromagnetic cgs system , electric current is a fundamental quantity defined via ampere 's law .
the square of the speed of light appears explicitly in some of the equations interrelating quantities in this system .
furthermore , within cgs , there are several possible choices of electromagnetic units .