electromagnetism is a field of physics .
the electromagnetic force is made up of electric fields and magnetic fields .
the other three fundamental forces are the strong interaction , the weak interaction , and gravitation .
at high energy the weak force and the force are combined as a single electroweak force .
the electromagnetic force is a measure of electromagnetic radiation that includes both electricity and magnetism as different forms of the same thing .
the electromagnetic force is important in determining the internal properties of most objects encountered in daily life .
the electromagnetic attraction between atomic nuclei and their orbital electrons holds atoms together .
the chemical bonds between atoms make molecules , and intermolecular forces .
the electromagnetic force is the force that changes chemical reactions between the electrons of neighboring atoms .
there are many mathematical descriptions of the electromagnetic field .
electric fields are described as potential and electric current .
in faraday 's law , magnetic fields are associated with electromagnetic induction and magnetism .
this led to the development of special relativity by albert einstein in 1905 .
originally , electricity and magnetism were two different types of forces .
this was in 1873 , with the publication of james clerk maxwell 's " a treatise on electricity and magnetism " .
while preparing for an evening lecture on 21 april 1820 , hans christian ørsted made a surprising observation .
as he was setting up his materials , he noticed a compass needle deflected away from magnetic north when the electric current from the battery was using was switched on and off .
this deflection convinced him that magnetic fields radiate from all sides of a wire carrying an electric current , just as light and heat do , and that it confirmed a direct relationship between electricity and magnetism .
at the time of discovery , ørsted did not suggest any explanation of the phenomenon .
however , three months later he began more investigations .
soon after he found out that an electric current produces a magnetic field as it flows through a wire .
the cgs unit of magnetic induction is named in honor of his contributions to the field of electromagnetism .
his findings resulted in intensive research throughout the scientific community in electrodynamics .
they influenced andre-marie ampere 's developments of a single mathematical form to represent the magnetic forces between current-carrying conductors .
ørsted 's discovery also was a major step toward a unified concept of energy .
this unification was extended by michael faraday , and partially reformulated by oliver heaviside and heinrich hertz .
it has had far-reaching consequences , one of which was the understanding of the nature of light .
unlike the electromagnetic theory of that time , light and other electromagnetic waves are at present seen as taking the form of quantized , self-propagating oscillatory electromagnetic field disturbances called photons .
different frequencies of oscillation give rise to the different forms of electromagnetic radiation , from radio waves at the lowest frequencies , to visible light at the highest frequencies .
ørsted was the only person to examine the relationship between electricity and magnetism .
in 1802 , gian domenico romagnosi , an italian legal scholar , deflected a magnetic needle with a voltaic pile .
the factual setup of the experiment is not completely clear , so if current flowed across the needle or not .
it was largely overlooked by the contemporary scientific community .
an earlier wireless connection between electricity and magnetism was reported by a dr . cookson .
the account said : a tradesman at wakefield in yorkshire , having put up a great number of knives and forks in a large box . . . and having placed the box in the corner of a large room , there happened a sudden storm of thunder , lightning , & c . . . the owner of the people who took up the emptying the box on a counter , where the people who took up the nails that took up on a counter , the people who took up the nails that took up the nails that took up on a counter .
in 1910 , whittaker suggested that this event was responsible for giving the power of sewing and magnetizing the anti-nuclear war .
the electromagnetic force is the force of the earth .
the other fundamental forces are : all other forcesferatunity , friction , contact forces charlemagne are derived from these four fundamental forcesforms .
the electromagnetic force is responsible for practically all phenomena one encounters in daily life above the nuclear scale , with the exception of gravity .
the electromagnetic force is made up of the nucleus of the atom .
these are the reason why they are moving by their movement .
this includes the forces we experience in " pushing " or " pulling " ordinary material objects , which result from the intermolecular forces that act between the individual molecules in our bodies and those in the objects .
the electromagnetic force is also involved in all forms of chemical phenomena .
a necessary part of understanding the intra-atomic and intermolecular forces is the effective force produced by the momentum of the electrons ' movement , such as electrons move between interacting atoms they carry momentum with them .
as a collection of electrons becomes more confined , their minimum momentum always increases due to the pauli exclusion principle .
matter at the molecular scale is determined by the balance between the electromagnetic force and the force generated by the exchange of momentum carried by the electrons themselves .
in 1600 , william gilbert proposed that electricity and magnetism , while both capable of causing attraction and repulsion of objects , were distinct effects .
mariners had noticed that lightning strikes had the ability to disturb a compass needle .
the link between lightning and electricity was not confirmed until benjamin franklin 's proposed experiments in 1752 .
one of the first to find and publish a link between man-made electric current and magnetism was romagnosi , who in 1802 noticed that connecting a wire across a wire across a compass deflected a nearby compass needle .
however , the effect did not become widely known until 1820 , when ørsted performed a similar experiment .
ørsted 's work influenced ampere to produce a theory of electromagnetism that set the subject on a mathematical foundation .
the theory was developed by various physicists during the period between 1820 and 1873 .
in classical electromagnetism , the electromagnetic field is defined by a set of equations called maxwell 's equations .
it is compatible with special relativity .
the speed of light in a vacuum is a universal constant .
this violates galilean invariance , a long-standing cornerstone of classical mechanics .
one way to make the two theorieschus electromagnetism and classical mechanics suggests the existence of a luminiferous aether through which the light propagates .
later , they did not detect the presence of the aether .
albert einstein solved the problem with special relativity , which replaced classical kinematics with a new theory of kinematics .
although differing for more information , see history of special relativity .
in addition , relativity theory implies that in moving frames of reference , a magnetic field transforms to a field with a nonzero electric component .
hence the term ' electromagnetism ' , the term is used to describe the effect of the atom .
electromagnetism and special relativity make classical electromagnetism .
the maxwell equations are linear , in that a change in the sources generate the currents increases in the fields .
nonlinear dynamics can occur when electromagnetic fields are made of matter .
this is studied , for example , in the subject of magnetohydrodynamics , which combines maxwell theory with the navier – stokes equations .
electromagnetic units are part of a system of electrical units based primarily upon the magnetic properties of electric currents .
in the electromagnetic cgs system , electric current is a fundamental quantity defined via ampere 's law .
the square of the speed of light appears explicitly in some of the equations interrelating quantities in this system .
these are the same as maxwell 's equations .
this is because there is no one-to-one correspondence between electromagnetic units in si and those in cgs .
furthermore , within cgs , there are several possible choices of electromagnetic units .
among these choices , gaussian units are the most common today .
