in botany , a fruit is the seed-bearing structure in flowering plants flower .
fruits are the means by which angiosperms get seeds .
edible fruits , in particular , have propagated with the movements of humans and animals in a symbiotic relationship as a means for seed dispersal and nutrition .
fruits account for a large fraction of the world 's agricultural output .
in common usage , fruit is the fleshy seed-associated structures of a plant that are sweet or sour , and edible in the raw state such as apples , bananas , grapes , lemons , oranges , and strawberries .
fruit is not commonly called fruits , such as bean pods , corn kernels , tomatoes , and wheat grains .
the section of a fungus that produces spores is also called a fruiting body .
many common terms for seeds and fruit are not the same as the botanical classifications .
a " nut " is any hard , oily plant product .
a " nut " is a type of fruit and not a seed .
examples of culinary " vegetables " and nuts that are botanically fruit include corn , cucurbitsium , pumpkin , and squash squash squash squash squash ; eggplant , legumesbags beans , peanuts , and peas peaseux , sweet pepper , and tomato .
some spices , such as allspice and chili pepper , are fruits .
in contrast , rhubarb is often referred to as a fruit , because it is used to make sweet desserts such as pies .
a kind of cereal grain is called a caryopsis .
however , the fruit wall is very thin .
the outer , often edible layer , is the " pericarp " , formed from the ovary and surrounding the seeds , although in some species other tissues may contribute to or form the edible portion .
the pericarp may be described in three layers from outer to inner , the epicarp , mesocarp and endocarp .
fruit that bears a prominent pointed terminal projection is said to be " beaked " .
a fruit can be maturation of one or more flowers .
inside the ovary / ovaries are one or more ovules where the ovule contains the egg cell .
after fertilization , these ovules become seed .
the ovules are fertilized in a process that starts with pollination .
after pollination , a tube grows from the pollen through the stigma into the ovary and two sperm are transferred from the pollen to the megagametophyte .
the cell forms a zygote , and the second sperm enters the cell .
later the zygote will give rise to the embryo of the seed , and the endosperm mother cell will give rise to endosperm , a nutritive tissue used by the embryo .
as the ovules develop into seeds , the ovary begins to ripen and the ovary wall , the " pericarp " , may become fleshy patches of fruit or fruits .
in some multiseeded fruits , the size to which the flesh develops is proportional to the number of fertilized ovules .
the pericarp is often differentiated into two or three distinct layers called the " exocarp " lilith outer layer , also called epicarpzong , " mesocarp " edmonton middle layer downwards , and " endocarpfiltration " .
in some fruits , especially simple fruits derived from an inferior ovary , other parts of the flower freyja such as the floral tube , including the petals , sepals , and stamens ⟩ , fuse with the ovary and ripen with it .
in other cases the petals and / or stamens fall off .
when such other flowers are a significant part of the fruit , it is called an " accessory fruit " .
it is important to study flower structure to understand how a particular fruit forms .
the three main groups are simple fruits , aggregate fruits , and composite fruits .
the groupings are not relevant , since many diverse plant taxa may be in the same group , but reflect how the flower organs are arranged and how the fruits develop .
simple fruits can be either dry or fleshy .
dry fruits may be either dehiscentcentering they open to discharge seedshora , or indehiscent ( they do not open to discharge seeds ashore .
fruits in which part or all of the " pericarp " fruit walloons are fleshy at maturity are " simple fleshy fruits " .
types of simple , fleshy , fruits shouldered , or " etaerio " , develops from a single flower with many simple pistils .
pome fruits of the family rosaceae ,wyla include apples , pears , rosehips , and saskatoon berryttes .
schizocarp fruits form from a syncarpous ovary and do not really dehisce , but rather split into segments with one or more seeds .
carrot seed is an example .
aggregate fruits form from single flowers that have multiple carpels which are not joined together , i . e . each pistil contains one carpel .
each pistil forms a fruitlet , and together the fruitlets are called an etaerio .
the four types of aggregate fruits are the " etaerios " of achenes , follicles , drupelets , and berries .
" ranunculaceae " , like " clematis " and " ranunculus " have an etaerio of achenes , " calotropis " has an etaerio of follicles , and " rubus " species like raspberry , have an etaerio of drupelets .
annona have an etaerio of berries .
the raspberry , whose pistils are called " drupelets " because each is like a small drupe attached to the receptacle .
in some bramble fruits fruits fruits fruits fruits fruits fruits fruits fruits fruits mustache , such as blackberry whereupon the receptacle is elongated and part of the ripe fruit , making the blackberry an " aggregate-accessory " fruit .
the strawberry is also an accessory fruit , only one in which the seeds are contained in achenes .
in all these examples , the fruit develops from a single flower with many pistils .
a multiple fruit is one formed from a cluster of flowers flowers ashore called an inflorescence .
each flower produces a fruit , but these mature into a single mass .
examples are the pineapple , fig , mulberry , osage-orange , and breadfruit .
in the photograph on the right , stages of flowering and fruit development in the noni or indian mulberryerryerryerryerryerry lombardy can be observed on a single branch .
first an inflorescence of white flowers called a head is produced .
after fertilization , each flower develops into a drupe .
berries are another kind of fruit .
the ovary may be made of several carpels .
some or all of the edible part of accessory fruit is not generated by the ovary .
accessory fruit can be simple , aggregate , or multiple , i . e . , they can include one or more pistils and other parts from the same flower , or the pistils and other parts of many flowers .
seedlessness is an important feature of some fruits of commerce .
commercial bananas and pineapples are examples of seedless fruits .
some citrus fruits are valued for their seedlessness .
in some species , seedlessness is the result of " parthenocarpy " , where fruits set without fertilization .
parthenocarpic fruit set may or may not require pollination , but most seedless citrus fruits require a stimulus from pollination to produce fruit .
seedless bananas and grapes are triploids , and seedlessness results from the abortion of the embryonic plant that is produced by fertilisation .
variations in fruit structures largely depend on their seeds ' mode of dispersal .
this dispersal can be achieved by animals , such as water , or wind .
some fruits have coats covered with spikes or hooked burrs .
examples include cocklebur and unicorn plant .
the sweet flesh of many fruits is “ deliberately ” appealing to animals , so that the seeds held within are eaten and " unwittingly " carried away and deposited deposited deposited elsewhere .
likewise , the nutritious oily kernels of nuts are appealing to rodents squirrels squirrels .
other fruits are elongated and flattened out naturally , and so become thin , like wings or helicopter blades , e . g . elm , maple , and tuliptree .
this is an evolutionary mechanism to increase dispersal distance away from the parent , by wind .
other wind-dispersed fruit have tiny " parachutes " , e . g . , milkweed , salsify .
coconut fruits can float thousands of miles in the ocean to spread seeds .
some other fruits can be planted by the water .
some fruits fling seeds substantial distances at up to 100 m in sandbox tree ferns .
many hundreds of fruits , including fleshy fruits fruits fruits fruits fruits fruits fruitsalle like mango , peach , pear , and watermelon inquiries are commercially valuable as human food .
fruits are also used in manufactured foods such as cakes , cookies , ice cream , muffins , or beverages .
fruits are also used for gift giving , e . g . , in the form of fruit baskets and fruit bouquets .
many vegetables are botanical fruits , including bell pepper , cucumber , eggplant , green bean , okra , pumpkin , squash , tomato , and zucchini .
the fruit is pressed for olive oil .
spices like allspice , black pepper , paprika , and vanilla come from berries .
fruits can be high in fiber , vitamin c , and water .
the use of fruit is generally associated with reduced risks of several diseases and functional declines associated with aging .
fruits have been such a major part of the human diet .
the cdc recommends proper fruit handling and preparation to reduce the risk of food contamination and foodborne illness .
fresh fruits and vegetables should be carefully selected .
all fruits and vegetables should be rinsed before eating .
this recommendation also applies to produce with rinds that are not eaten .
it should be done just before preparing or eating to avoid premature spoilage .
fruits and vegetables should be kept separate from raw foods like meat , poultry , and seafood , as well as from utensils that have come in contact with raw foods .
fruits and vegetables that are not going to be cooked should be thrown away if they have touched raw meat , poultry , seafood , or eggs .
all cut , peeled , or cooked fruits and vegetables should be refrigerated within two hours .
after a certain time , harmful bacteria may grow on them and increase the risk of foodborne illness .
fruit allergies make up about 10 % of all food related allergies .
all fruits benefit from proper post harvest care .
keeping most fruits in an efficient cold chain is best for post harvest storage .
