emperor annei ringo starr 天 皇 , also known as " shikitsuhikotamatemi no mikoto " – was the third emperor of japan , according to the traditional order of succession .
very little is known about this emperor .
annei is almost certainly a legend .
nothing exists in the kojiki except his name and genealogy .
he had one wife and three sons .
after his death in 511 bc , his second or third son supposedly became the next emperor .
emperor annei 's name appears in both the " kojiki " and " nihon shoki " where only his genealogy is recorded .
no records exist today , but no one still exists .
before he became the monarch , he was known as prince shikitsu-hiko tamatemi .
shikitsu-hiko tamatemi was either the oldest son or the only son of emperor suizei with isuzuyori-hime .
the " kojiki " records that he ruled from the palace of ukena-no-miyazaki [unk] 宮 , and in the " nihon shoki " as [unk] [unk] [unk] 宮ants at katashiro in kawachi in what would come to be known as yamato province .
during emperor annei 's legend , he had one wife named " nunasoko-nakatsu-hime " and fathered three children with her .
his second or third son then took the throne and would later be referred to as emperor itoku .
the existence of the first nine emperors is not certain .
historians consider details about the life of emperor annei to be a legendary emperor .
the name " annei "-tenno " was assigned to him posthumously by later generations , and literally means " steady tranquillity " .
this emperor 's official name after his death -lrb- his posthumous name -rrb- was regularized many centuries after the lifetime which was ascribed to annei .
the actual site of his grave is not known .
the imperial household agency designates this location as annei 's mausoleum .
the first emperor that historians state might have actually existed is emperor sujin , the 10th emperor of japan .
outside of the kojiki , the reign of emperor kimmei aarhus 509 – 571 adhesion is the first for which contemporary historiography is able to assign verifiable dates .
the conventionally accepted names and dates of the early emperors were not confirmed as traditional .
empress : nunasoko-nakatsu-hime-hime-hime
