jack kerouac oddly -lrb- march 12,1922 – october 21,1969 -rrb- was an american writer and poet .
he is considered a literary iconoclast .
kerouac is recognized for his method of spontaneous prose .
his work covers topics such as catholic spirituality , jazz , promiscuity , buddhism , drugs , poverty , and travel .
he became an underground celebrity and , with other beats , a progenitor of the hippie movement .
kerouac died from a heart attack in los angeles , california , aged 47 .
since his death , kerouac 's prestige has grown , and several previously unseen works have been published .
all of his books are in print today , including " the town and the city " , " on the road " , " doctor sax " , " the dharma bums " , " the subterraneans " , " desolation angels " , " visions of cody " , " the sea is my brother " , and " big sur " .
kerouac was born in lowell , massachusetts .
there is some confusion surrounding his name , partly because of variations on the spelling of kerouac , and because of kerouac 's own statement of his name as jean-louis lebris de kerouac .
his reason for that statement seems to be linked to an old family legend .
kerouac 's baptism certificate says that his name was simply named jean louis kirouac , the most common spelling of the name in quebec .
his family was a middle-class merchant colonist , urbain-francois le bihan , sieur de kervoac , whose sons married french canadians .
kerouac 's father leo was born in a family of potato farmers in the village of saint-hubert-de-riviere-du-loup , quebec .
jack also had various stories about his surname .
in one interview he claimed it was from the name of the cornish languageement " kernewek "arth and that the kerouacs had fled from cornwall to brittany .
another version was that the kerouacs had come to cornwall from ireland before the time of christ and the name meant " language of the house " .
in still another interview he said it was an irish word for " language of the water " and related to " kerwick " .
kerouac is a town in brittany , france .
jack kerouac later referred to 34 beaulieu street as " sad beaulieu " .
the kerouac family was living in the kerouac family in 1926 .
this deeply affected four-year-old jack , who would later say that gerard followed him in life as a guardian angel .
this is the gerard of kerouac 's novel " visions of gerard " .
he had one sister , caroline .
kerouac was referred to as ti jean or little john around the house during his childhood .
kerouac spoke french until he began learning english at age six .
he was a child who was devoted to his mother .
she was a devout catholic .
kerouac later said that his mother was the only woman he ever loved .
gerard 's mother had been a friend , and his father left it in drinking , gambling , and smoking .
some of kerouac 's poetry was written in french .
in 2016 , a whole volume of previously unpublished works originally written in french by kerouac was published as " la vie est d ' hommage " .
kerouac had his first confession on may 17,1928 .
he was told to say a rosary , during which he heard god told him that he had a good soul , that he would suffer in life and die in pain and horror , but would in the end receive salvation .
this experience , along with his dying brother 's vision of the virgin mary complexion as the nuns fawned over him , convinced he was a saintphone , combined with a later study of buddhism and an ongoing commitment to christ , solidified the worldview which would inform kerouac 's work .
kerouac once told ted berrigan , in an interview for " the paris review " , of an event in the 1940s .
he said : " a whole bunch of rabbis walking arm in arm . . . . . they predicts part for this christian man and his wife , so my father went poom !
he knocked a rabbi right in the gutter .
leo , after the death of his child , also treated a priest with similar contempt , angrily throwing him out of the house despite gabrielle .
kerouac has a good sports career as a running back in football .
he studied at columbia university .
during his freshman season , kerouac broke a leg playing football .
while at columbia , kerouac wrote several sports articles for the student newspaper , the " columbia daily spectator " .
he studied at the new school .
when his football career ended , kerouac dropped out of the university .
he lived with his girlfriend and future first wife edie parker .
it was during this time that he met the beat generation people – now famous — with whom he would always be associated , and who as characters formed the basis of many of his novels , including allen ginsberg , neal cassady , john clellon holmes , herbert huncke , lucien carr and william s . burroughs .
he served only eight days of active duty before arriving on the sick list .
kerouac said he " asked for an aspirin for his headaches and they diagnosed me dementia praecox and sent me here . "
the medical examiner said that kerouac 's military adjustment was poor , saying " i just can ' t stand it ; i like to be by myself . "
two days later he was discharged from the psychiatric hospital .
kerouac 's first novel " the sea is my brother " was published in 1966 .
it was written in 1942 , but it was not published until 2011 .
kerouac described the work as being about " man 's simple revolt from society as it is , with the inequalities , frustration , and self-inflicted agonies . "
he called it a " crock as literature " , and he never tried to publish it .
in 1944 , kerouac was arrested as a material witness in the murder of david kammerer , who had been stalking kerouac 's friend lucien carr .
william burroughs was a native of st . louis .
carr , kammerer 's homosexual obsession turned aggressive , finally provoking carr to stab him to death in self-defense .
carr dumped the body in the hudson river .
after that , carr helped kerouac get help .
kerouac disposed of the murder weapon and buried kammerer 's eyeglasses .
he turned himself in to the police .
kerouac and burroughs were later arrested .
kerouac 's father refused to pay his bail .
kerouac then agreed to marry edie parker if her parents would pay the bail .
lastly she married sally annulled in 1948 .
kerouac and burroughs wrote a book about the kammerer killing entitled " and the hippos were boiled in their tanks " .
though the book was not published during their lifetime , an excerpt appeared in word virus : the william s . burroughs reader " parapet and as noted below , the novel was finally published late 2008bery .
kerouac also later wrote about the killing in his novel " vanity of duluoz " .
he lived with his parents in the ozone park neighborhood of queens , new york .
he wrote his first novel , " the town and the city " .
he jokingly called him " the wizard of ozone park " .
" the town and the city " was published in 1950 under the name " john kerouac " .
it was influenced by kerouac 's reading of thomas wolfe .
the book was edited by robert giroux .
for the next six years kerouac continued to write regularly .
he completed what is now known as " on the road " in april 1951 .
the book was largely autobiographical .
he finished the first version of the novel .
kerouac wrote the final draft in 20 days , with joan , his wife .
before beginning , kerouac cut sheets of tracing paper into long strips , wide enough for a typewriter , and taped them together into a 120-foot long roll which he then fed into the machine .
this let him to type continuously without the interruption of reloading pages .
the resulting manuscript contained no chapter or paragraph breaks and was much more explicit than the version which would eventually be published .
though " spontaneous , " kerouac had prepared before beginning to write .
in fact , according to his columbia professor and mentor , he had outlined much of the work in his journals over the years before .
though the work was finished quickly , kerouac had a long and difficult time finding a publisher .
before " on the road " was accepted by viking press , kerouac got a job as a " railroad brakeman and fire lookout " .
while employed in this way , he met and befriended abe green , a young freight train jumper who later introduced kerouac to herbert huncke , a times square street hustler and favorite of many beat generation writers .
kerouac also wrote about this : " vanity of duluoz " .
between 1955-1956 , he lived on and off with his sister , whom he called " nin , " and her husband , paul blake , at their home outside of rocky mount , n . c .rift in his works abroad .
he wrote " some of the dharma " , an imaginative book on buddhism , while living there .
publishers rejected " on the road " because of its experimental writing style and its sexual content .
many editors were also uncomfortable with the idea of publishing a book that contained what was , for the era , graphic descriptions of drug use and homosexual behavior .
kerouac said , " on the road " was really a story about two catholic friends who were roaming the country in search of god .
we found him .
i found him in the sky , in market street san francisco apartment .
there is no other way out for the holy man : he must sweat for god .
he says that god must not be spoken about .
the most important thing to comprehend is that kerouac was an american catholic author .
in 1951 joan haverty left and divorced .
in february 1952 , kerouac gave birth to kerouac 's only child , jan kerouac .
for the next several years kerouac continued writing and traveling .
he often had severe problems with depression .
during this period , he finished drafts of what would become ten more novels , including " doctor sax " , " tristessa " , and " desolation angels " .
he had a brief but passionate affair with an african american woman .
this woman was the basis for the character named " mardou " in the novel " the subterraneans " .
kerouac changed the story from new york to san francisco .
kerouac discovered the book " a buddhist bible " at the san jose library in 1954 .
kerouac had earlier taken an interest in eastern thought .
in 1946 he read heinrich zimmer 's myths and symbols in indian art and civilization .
in 1955 , kerouac published a biography of siddhartha gautama , titled " wake up : a life of the buddha " , which was unpublished during his lifetime , but eventually serialized in " " , 1993 – 95 .
it was published by viking in 2008 .
kerouac found enemies on both sides of the political spectrum , the right disdaining his association with drugs and sexual libertinism and the left contemptuous of his anti-communism and catholic catholicism .
in " desolation angels " he wrote , " when i went to columbia all they tried to teach us was marx , as if i cared " considering marxism , like freudianism , to be an illusory tangent tangent tangent tangent tangent tangent tangent tangent tangent tangent tangent tangent tangent !
in 1957 , after being rejected by several other publishers , " on the road " was finally bought by viking press .
many of the more sexually explicit passages were removed .
these changes have often led to criticisms of the alleged spontaneity of kerouac 's style .
in july 1957 , kerouac moved to a small house in the college park section of orlando , florida .
weeks later , a review of the book by gilbert millstein appeared in " the new york times " proclaiming kerouac the voice of a new generation .
kerouac was considered a major american writer .
he was a friend of the beat generation , william s . burroughs , and gregory corso .
the beat generation was invented by kerouac .
huncke used the term " beat " to describe someone with little money and few prospects .
" i 'm beat to my socks " , he had said .
kerouac 's fame came as a surge that would ultimately be his undoing .
kerouac 's novel is often described as the defining work of the post-world war ii beat generation .
he once said , " i 'm not a beatnik .
i 'm a catholic " , showing the reporter a painting of pope paul vi and saying , " you know who painted that ?
kerouac 's best known work " on the road " was very popular .
his celebrity status brought publishers desiring unwanted manuscripts that were rejected before it was published .
after nine months , he no longer felt safe in public .
he was beaten by three men outside the san remo cafe in new york city one night .
neal cassady , a result of his new notoriety as the central character of the book , was set up and arrested for selling marijuana .
kerouac 's book " the dharma bums " , set in california and washington , was published in 1958 .
it was written in orlando , florida between november 26 and december 7,1957 .
to begin writing " dharma bums " , kerouac typed onto a ten-foot length of paper , to avoid interrupting his flow for paper changes , as he had done six years before for " on the road " .
kerouac was demoralized by criticism of " dharma bums " from such respected figures in the american field of buddhism as zen teachers ruth fuller sasaki and alan watts .
he said that " even suzuki was looking at me through slitted eyes as though i was a monstrous imposter . "
he passed up the opportunity to reunite with snyder in california , and explained to philip whalen " i 'd be ashamed to confront you and gary now i 've become so decadent and drunk and don ’ t give a shit .
i 'm not a buddhist any more . "
in further reaction to their criticism , he quoted part of abe green 's cafe recitation , " thrasonical yawning in the abattoir of the soul " : " a gaping , rabid congregation , eager to bathe , are washed over by the font of euphoria , and bask like protozoans in the celebrated light . "
many think that this clearly showed kerouac 's journey on an emotional roller coaster of unprecedented adulation and spiritual demoralization .
kerouac also wrote and narrated a beat movie titled " pull my daisy " breuning 1959 whitaker , directed by robert frank and alfred leslie .
it stars allen ginsberg , gregory corso , and david amram .
the title was changed at the last moment when mgm released a movie by the same name in july 1959 that sensationalized beatnik culture .
the television series " route 66 " showed two untethered young men " on the road " in a corvette seeking adventure and fueling their travels by apparently plentiful temporary jobs in the various u . s . locales framing the anthology-styled stories , gave the impression of being a commercially successful model for misappropriation of the road story on kerouac 's " .
even the leads , buz and todd , bore a resemblance to the dark , athletic kerouac and the blonde cassady / moriarty , respectively .
kerouac felt he 'd been ripped off by " route 66 " creator stirling silliphant .
john antonelli 's 1985 documentary " kerouac , the movie " begins and ends with footage of kerouac reading from " on the road " and " visions of cody " on the steve allen plymouth show " in november 1959 .
kerouac appears intelligent but shy .
" naw , " says kerouac , sweating and fidgeting .
in 1965 , he met the poet youenn gwernig who was a breton american like him in new york .
gwernig used to translate his breton language poems in english in order to make kerouac read and understand them : " meeting with jack kerouac in 1965 , for instance , was a decisive turn .
he could not speak breton , he asked me : ' would you not write some of your poems in english ?
i 'd really like to read them !
. . . . i wrote an dir-dir-stairs of steel for him , and kept on doing so .
that 's why i often write my poems in breton , french and english . "
in 1964 , kerouac suffered a heart attack and suffered a paralyzing stroke .
neal cassady died in mexico in 1968 .
also in 1968 , he appeared on the television show " firing line " .
kerouac talked about the counterculture of the 1960s in what would be his last appearance on television .
kerouac worked on a book about his father 's print shop in lowell , massachusetts .
he suddenly felt nauseated and walked to the bathroom , where he vomited blood .
he was taken to a nearby hospital .
he received several transfusions in an attempt to make up for the loss of blood , and doctors subsequently attempted surgery , but a damaged liver prevented his blood from clotting .
he died at 5 : 15 the following morning at st . anthony 's hospital , never having regained consciousness after the operation .
his cause of death was an internal hemorrhagelastic bleeding esophageal varicesicesrford caused by cirrhosis , the result of long alcohol abuse .
he suffered in a bar fight several weeks earlier .
he is buried in the edson cemetery in lowell , massachusetts .
at the time of his death , he was living with his third wife , stella sampas kerouac , and his mother gabrielle .
kerouac 's mother inherited most of his estate .
he was honored with a doctor of letters degree from his hometown university of massachusetts lowell on june 2,2007 .
kerouac is generally considered to be the father of the beat movement , although he actively disliked such labels .
kerouac 's method was influenced by the explosion of jazz , especially the bebop genre established by charlie parker , dizzy gillespie , thelonious monk , and others .
later , kerouac included ideas he developed from his buddhist studies that began with gary snyder .
he often called his style as " spontaneous prose . "
although kerouac 's prose was spontaneous , he mainly wrote autobiographical novels fragments or " roman a clef " interviewed by the people he wrote .
his books showed this spontaneous approach , including " visions of cody " , " visions of gerard " , " big sur " , and " the subterraneans " .
the central features of this writing method were the ideas of breathylus borrowed from jazz and from buddhist meditation breathing clearer , improvising words over the inherent structures of mind and language , and limited revision .
connected with this idea of breath was the elimination of the period , substituting a long connecting dash .
as such , the phrases between dashes might resemble improvisational jazz licks .
when spoken , the words are written in a certain musical rhythm and tempo .
kerouac was greatly admired and was influenced by gary snyder .
" the dharma bums " contains a mountain climbing trip kerouac took with snyder , and includes excerpts of letters from snyder .
while living with snyder outside mill valley , california , in 1956 , kerouac worked on a book about him .
this eventually became " dharma bums " , which kerouac described as " mostly about snyder . "
that summer , kerouac worked as a fire lookout on desolation peak in the north cascades in washington , d . c .
on desolation peak he 'd hoped to " come face to face with god or tathagata and find out once and for all this existence .
but instead i 'd come face to face with myself . . and many 's the time i 'd die of boredom or jump off the mountain . "
kerouac described the experience in desolation angels and later in " the dharma bums " .
kerouac would go on for hours , often drunk , to friends and strangers about his way .
allen ginsberg , initially unimpressed , would later be one of his great proponents .
ginsberg and others decided to formally explain his style .
he wrote " the most concise was " belief and technique for modern prose " , a list of 30 " essentials " .
kerouac 's writing technique did not produce lively or energetic prose .
truman capote once said about kerouac 's work " that 's not writing , it 's typing " .
according to carolyn cassady and others , he constantly rewrote and revised his work .
although the body of kerouac 's work has been published in english recent research has shown that , in addition to his poetry and letters to friends and family , he also wrote unpublished works of fiction in french .
all these works , including " la nuit est ma femme " , " sur le chemin " , and large sections of " maggie cassidy " screenwriters originally written in french ; now in a volume entitled " la vie est d ' hommage "arthal , edited by university professor jean-christophe cloutier .
in 1996 , the " nouvelle revue francaise " published excerpts and an article on " la nuit est ma femme " , and scholar paul maher jr . , in his biography " kerouac : his life and work " , " discussed sur le chemin 's plot and characters .
the novella was completed in five days in mexico during december 1952 .
kerouac refers to this short novel in a letter addressed to neal cassadyadyadyeux .
the published novel runs over 110 pages .
it is set in 1935 , mostly on the east coast .
he often relyed on phonetics in order to make the french-canadian vernacular .
even though this work has the same title as one of his best known english novels , it is the original french version of an incomplete translation that would later become " old bull in the bowery "
the completed translation of " sur le chemin " is edited by cloutier .
" la nuit est ma femme " was written in early 1951 and completed a few days or weeks before he began the original english version of " on the road " .
kerouac 's early writing , particularly his first novel " the town and the city " , was more conventional , and bore the strong influence of thomas wolfe .
kerouac 's technique was influenced by jazz , especially bebop , and later , buddhism .
the diamond sutra was the most important buddhist text for kerouac , and " probably one of the three or four most influential things he ever read " .
in 1955 , he began a study of the sutra , in a repeating weekly cycle , devoting one day to each of the six paramitas , and the seventh to the concluding passage on samadhi .
this was his only reading on desolation peak , and he hoped by this means to condition his mind to emptiness , and possibly to have a vision .
kerouac 's work is about more than any other author .
kerouac had high esteem for joyce .
he wrote in a letter to ginsberg , " i can tell you now as i look back on the flood of language .
it is like ulysses and should be treated with the same gravity .
kerouac liked joyce 's experimental use of language , as seen in his novel " visions of cody " .
kerouac 's works had a major impact on the popular rock music of the 1960s .
some famous artists like bob dylan , the beatles , tom waits , and the doors all have a big influence on kerouac .
jim morrison and ray manzarek quote jack kerouac and his novel " on the road " as one of the band 's greatest influences .
in his book " light my fire : my life with the doors " , ray manzarektness wrote " i suppose if jack kerouac had never written " on the road " , the doors would never have existed . "
the band 's song " hey jack kerouac " was released in 1987 .
the album " maroon " references kerouac .
the school was named after allen ginsberg and anne waldman , a private buddhist university in boulder , colorado .
the school offers a ba in writing and literature , mfas in writing & poetics and creative writing , and a summer writing program .
from 1978 to 1992 , joy walsh published 28 issues of a magazine about kerouac , " moody street irregulars " .
kerouac 's french canadian origins inspired a 1987 national film board of canada docudrama " jack kerouac 's road : a franco-american odyssey " , directed by acadian poet hermenegilde chiasson .
in the mid-1980s , kerouac park was in lowell , massachusetts .
a street , " rue de jack kerouac " , is named after him in quebec city , as well as in the hamlet of kerouac , lanmeur , brittany .
the kerouac festival was established in 2010 .
in the 1980s , the city of san francisco named a one-way street , jack kerouac alley , in his honor in chinatown .
in 1997 , the house on clouser avenue where " the dharma bums " was written was purchased by a newly formed non-profit group , the jack kerouac writers in residence project of orlando , inc .
this group gives opportunities for aspiring writers to live in the same house in which kerouac was inspired , with room and board covered for three months .
in 1998 , the chicago tribune published a story about kerouac 's family .
the article showed that kerouac 's estate was worth only $ 91 at the time of his death .
in 2007 , kerouac was awarded a posthumous honorary degree from the university of massachusetts lowell .
in 2009 , the movie " one fast move or i 'm gone – kerouac 's big sur " was released .
it is about the time in kerouac 's life that led to his novel " big sur " .
the movie also describes the people and places on which kerouac based his characters and settings , including the cabin in bixby canyon .
it features benjamin gibbard wouldn death cab for cutie isleyeux and jay farrarlberg performing songs based on kerouac 's " big sur " .
in 2010 , during the first weekend of october lowell , the 25th anniversary of the literary festival " lowell celebrates kerouac " was held in kerouac 's birthplace of massachusetts .
it had walking tours , literary seminars , and musical performances focused on kerouac 's work and that of the beat generation .
in the 2010s , there have been a surge in movies based on the beat generation .
kerouac is also in the movies " howl " and " kill your darlings " .
a movie version of " on the road " was released internationally in 2012 .
michael polish directed " big sur " .
it was released in 2013 .
a species of indian platygastrid wasp that is phoretichyllum hitch-hiking shouldn on grasshoppers is named after him as " mantibaria kerouaci " .
he is best known for his novels .
kerouac said that he wanted " to be considered a jazz poet blowing a long blues in an afternoon jazz session on sunday . "
kerouac 's poems are mainly about his free flowing , uninhibited prose .
" mexico city blues " is a collection of poems published in 1959 .
in much of his poetry , to achieve a jazz-like rhythm , kerouac made use of the long dash in place of a period .
other well-known poems by kerouac , such as " bowery blues " , have jazz rhythms with buddhist themes of samsara , the cycle of life and death , and samadhi , the concentration of composing the mind .
kerouac 's poetry uses repetition and themes of the troubles and sense of loss experienced in life .
in 2007 , viking issued two new editions : " on the road : the original scroll " , " and " on the road : 50th anniversary edition " .
by far the more significant is " scroll , " a transcription of the original draft typed as one long paragraph on sheets of tracing paper .
the text is more sexually explicit than viking allowed to be published in 1957 .
the indianapolis colts owner jim irsay paid $ 2.43 million for the first scroll .
the other new issue , " 50th anniversary edition " , is a reissue of the 40th anniversary issue under an updated title .
the kerouac / burroughs manuscript , " and the hippos were boiled in their tanks " was published for the first time on november 1,2008 by grove press .
previously , a fragment of the manuscript had been published in the burroughs compendium , " word virus " .
les editions du boreal , a montreal-based publishing house , obtained rights from kerouac 's estate to publish a collection of works titled " la vie est d ' hommage " ashore .
it includes sixteen unpublished works , in french , including a novella , " sur le chemin " , " la nuit est ma femme " , and large sections of " maggie cassidy " originally written in french .
both " sur le chemin " and " la nuit est ma femme " have also been translated to english by jean-christophe cloutier , in collaboration with kerouac , and were published in 2016 by the library of america in " the unknown kerouac " .
