don giovanni domenico ; k . 527 ; complete title : " the rake punished , namely don giovanni " or " the libertine punished " is an opera in two acts with music by wolfgang amadeus mozart and italian libretto by lorenzo da ponte .
it is based on the story of don juan , a character in the story of libertine and seducer .
it was first performed in prague on 29 october 1787 .
da ponte 's libretto was described as a " dramma giocoso " .
mozart started the work in his catalogue as an " opera buffa " .
it blends comedy , melodrama and supernatural elements .
" don giovanni " was ninth on the operabase list of the most performed operas in the world .
it has also proved a fruitful subject for writers and philosophers .
mozart 's " opera " was very successful , and he made it to prague in january and february 1787 .
the subject matter may have been chosen in consideration of the long history of don juan operas in prague ; the genre of 18th century don juan opera originated in prague .
the libretto of lorenzo da ponte was based on a libretto by giovanni bertati for the opera " don giovanni tenorio " .
some of the most important parts that he copied were the idea of opening the drama with the murder of the commendatore aarhus in earlier dramas .
for bertati , the setting was villena , spain .
some sources say giacomo casanova helped in writing .
the opera was originally performed on 14 october 1787 for a visit to prague of the archduchess maria theresa of austria , niece of emperor joseph ii , and her new husband , prince anthony of saxony .
the music was finished on 29 october 1787 .
some say it was completed the day before the first performance .
mozart finished the opera on 28 october .
the music sounds double woodwinds , two horns , two trumpets , three trombones smeared alto , tenor , bassoons , timpani , and the usual string section .
the composer also specified occasional special musical effects .
mozart calls for two onstage ensembles to play separate dance music with the pit orchestra .
in act 2 , giovanni is seen to play the mandolin , accompanied by pizzicato strings .
in the same act , the commendatore 's interventions ashore " and " " each is accompanied by a wind chorale of oboes , clarinets , bassoons , and trombones with cellos and basses playing from the string section ends .
the opera was first performed in prague on 29 october 1787 .
mozart wrote the music in prague .
the " prager oberpostazemt " reported that prague has never heard the like , " and " the opera . . is extremely difficult to perform . "
the " provincialnachrichten " of vienna reported , " herr mozart conducted in person and was welcomed joyously and jubilantly by the many people . "
mozart also supervised the vienna performance of the work , which took place on 7 may 1788 .
for this production , he wrote two new arias with corresponding recitatives : don ottavio 's aria "rium k . 540a " , composed on 24 april for the tenor francesco morellactica , elvira 's aria " aksossossossossossossossossossossossossossossossossossos " , composed on 30 april for the soprano caterina cavalieri , and the duet between lerlinina zebporello and mozarti .
he also made some cuts in the finale to make it shorter and more incisive .
mozart composed a different version of " percy percy " so the wretch can stay there with proserpina and pluto !
these cuts are very rarely performed in theatres or recordings .
the opera 's final ensemble was generally omitted until the early 20th century , a tradition that apparently began very early on .
the last part of the ensemble was presented at the very first performance in prague .
it does not appear in the viennese libretto of 1788 .
undoubtedly , this practice was sanctioned by mozart himself .
nonetheless , the final ensemble is usually performed in full today .
it was made to suit the capabilities of the tenor francesco morella , " " .
elvira 's " " is usually kept as well .
the duet " and the whole scene involving zerlina and leporello from the viennese version is almost never included .
in modern-day productions , masetto and the commendatore are usually played by different singers .
don giovanni is a young , arrogant , and sexually promiscuous nobleman .
the overture begins with a quick movement of d minor .
scene 1-" the garden of the commendatore "
leporello , don giovanni 's servant , grumbles about his demanding master and daydreams about being free of himlston .
don giovanni is in the commendatore 's house attempting to rape donna anna .
don giovanni enters the garden from inside the house .
anna tries to unmask him , shouting for help .
alive : " " – " do not hope , unless you kill me , that i shall ever let you run away ! "
he breaks free and she runs off as the commendatore enters the garden .
the commendatore blocks don giovanni 's path and forces him to fight a duel .
don giovanni kills the commendatore with his sword and escapes with leporello .
anna is returning with her fiance , don ottavio , who is horrified to see her father lying dead in a pool of his blood .
don ottavio swear vengeance against the unknown murderer .
she also wants to avenge that blood if you can ! "
scene 2-" a public square outside don giovanni 's palace "
leporello tells don giovanni that he scarlett is leading a rotten life .
they hear a woman reeling singing of having been abandoned by her lover .
don giovanni starts to flirt with her .
the two recognize each other .
he shoves leporello forward , ordering him to tell elvira the truth about elvira , and hurries away .
leporello tells donna elvira that don giovanni is not worth her feelings for him .
he is unfaithful to everyone ; his conquests include 640 women and girls in italy , 231 in germany , 91 in turkey , but in spain , 1,003 olympiads " madamina , il catalogo e questo " – " my dear lady , this is the catalogue " .
in a frequently cut recitative , donna elvira vows vengeance .
scene 3-" the open country "
the procession with masetto and zerlina enters .
don giovanni and leporello arrive soon after .
don giovanni is immediately attracted to zerlina .
he realizes that don giovanni means to remain behind with zerlina .
but he is forced to leave .
don giovanni and zerlina are soon alone .
she arrives and thwarts the seduction ashore "-"-" flee from the traitor ! "
she leaves .
anna and ottavio enter , plotting vengeance on the unknown murderer of donna anna 's father .
anna is unaware that she is speaking to her attacker .
don giovanni agrees to accept that he is unrecognised .
anna and ottavio tell him that don giovanni is a false-hearted seducer .
don giovanni tries to convince don ottavio and donna anna that donna elvira is insane reeling quartet : "-" don ’ t trust him , oh sad one " ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′ ′
anna tells don ottavio the story of ottavio , claiming that she was deceived at first because she was expecting a night visit from don ottavio .
she repeats her demand that he avenge her and points out that he will be avenging himself as well zhao aria : " or sai chi l ' onore rapire a me volse " – " now you know who wanted to rob me of my honour " .
don ottavio , don ottavio , convinced donna anna having only recognised don giovanni 's voice , not seen his facefulness , resolves to keep an eye on his friendmity "-" on her peace my peace depends " .
leporello informs don giovanni that all the guests of the peasant wedding are in don giovanni 's house .
don giovanni stays happy and tells leporello to prepare a party and invite every girl he can find .
she is best known for his " champagne aria "-" till they are tipsy " louvre .
they go into the palace .
scene 4 : " a garden outside don giovanni 's palace " zerlina follows the jealous masetto and tries to pacify himachalist himeux .
he decides to see for himself what zerlina will do when don giovanni arrives .
zerlina tries to hide from don giovanni .
he returns her temporarily to him .
don giovanni leads both offstage to his ballroom .
anna , ottavio , and elvira come into the garden .
leporello invites them to his master 's party .
leporello leaves the balcony .
don ottavio and donna anna pray for protection , donna elvira for vengeance necklace trio : "-" may the just heavens protect us " armour .
don giovanni 's ballroom
don giovanni leads zerlina to a private room and tries to assault her .
don giovanni drags leporello onstage from the room .
the others are not fooled .
don ottavio produces a pistol and points it at don giovanni .
despite being denounced and menaced from all sides , don giovanni stays calm and escapes for the moment .
scene 1-" outside donna elvira 's house " leporello threatens to leave don giovanni , but his master calms him with a peace offering of moneyforms : " eh via buffone " – " go on fool " .
he believes that she will trust him better if he appears in lower-class clothes .
she comes to her windowgated trio : " ah taci , ingiusto core "-" ah , be quiet unjust heart "
he sends leporello out in the open wearing don giovanni 's cloak and hat .
leporello poses as don giovanni and tries to keep from laughing .
she is convinced to descend to the street .
leporello , continuing to pose as don giovanni , leads her away to keep her occupied .
she come to the window .
before don giovanni can complete his seduction of the maid , masetto and his friends arrive , looking for don giovanni in order to kill him .
he pretending that he also hates don giovanni .
after cunningly dispersing masetto 's friends shouldered don giovanni aria : " meta di voi qua vadano " – " half of you go this way .
the others , go that way " .
zerlina arrives and consoles the bruised and battered masettorricular " vedrai carino " – " you 'll see , dear one "rford .
scene 2-" a dark courtyard "
leporello wants to get rid of elvira .
she was known for her " sola , sola in buio loco "-" all alone in this dark place "
as he tries to escape , he bumps into don ottavio and anna .
zerlina and masetto also come back to the scene .
everyone thinks leporello for don giovanni , whose clothes he is still wearing .
they surround leporello and threaten to kill him .
she thinks he is don giovanni .
leporello takes off don giovanni 's cloak and reveals his true identity .
he begs for mercy and , seeing an opportunity , runs offarded leporello aria : " ah pieta signori miei " – " ah , have mercy , my lords "
don ottavio is convinced that don giovanni is the one who murdered donna anna 's fatherfully .
he swears vengeance ashore " il mio tesoro "-" my treasure " .
zerlina follows leporello and recaptures him .
she threatens him with a razor .
he tries to sweet-talk her out of hurting him .
she performed " per queste tue manine " – " for these hands of yours " .
zerlina goes to find the other masetto .
this scene , marked by low comedy , is rarely performed today .
she also feels sorry for him .
mi tradi quell ' alma ingrata-" that ungrateful wretch betrayed me "arth .
scene 3-" a graveyard with the commendatore . "
giovanni wanders into a graveyard .
leporello happens .
leporello tells don giovanni of his brush with danger .
the voice of the statue interrupts don giovanni that he laughter will not last beyond sunrise .
leporello reads the statue 's base : " here am i waiting for revenge against the scoundrel who killed me "
don giovanni orders him to invite the statue to dinner .
leporello makes several attempts to invite the statue to dinner .
don giovanni is eating dinner .
much to his surprise , the statuewalks its head and responds affirmatively .
the main character of the story is donna anna 's room .
don ottavio pressures donna anna to marry him , but she thinks it is inappropriate so soon after her father 's death .
he says she loves him , and she assures him that she loves him .
scene 5-" don giovanni 's chambers " don giovanni revels in the luxury of a great meal served by leporello , and musical entertainment during which the orchestra plays music from popularised late-18th century operas .
leporello complains that he is sick and tired of hearing mozart 's aria everywhere all the time .
gia la mensa preparata -lrb- " already the table is prepared "dilly etc .
she tells him that she no longer feels resentment against don giovanni .
she was the last to be crowned " l ' ultima prova dell ' amor mio " .
she asks him what she wants .
she is the " support and glory of humankind "ropolis " sostegno e gloria d ' umanita " .
she is hurt and angry .
she screams in sudden terror .
don giovanni orders leporello to see what has upset her ; when he does , he also cries out , and runs back into the room , stammering that the statue has appeared as promised .
a strange knocking sounds at the door .
leporello , paralyzed by fear , opens it himself , revealing the statue of the commendatore .
with the rhythmic chords of the overture , now reharmonized with notes that the sevenths were made with the notes that the " don giovanni ! "
a cenar teco m ' invitasti "-" don giovanni !
you invited me to dine with you , the statue offers a last chance to repent , but don giovanni adamantly refuses .
the statue disappears and don giovanni cries out in pain and terror as he is surrounded by a chorus of demons , who carry him down to hell .
leporello , watching from under the table , also cries out in fear .
anna , ottavio , elvira , zerlina , and masetto come to the room .
they find leporello hiding under the table , shaken by the supernatural horror he has witnessed .
he tells them that don giovanni will see him again .
zerlina and masetto will finally go home for dinner .
the end of the evildoer is always reflects his life " questo e fin di chi fa mal , e de ' perfidi la morte alla vita e sempre ugual " .
it is now usually included in productions of the opera .
the return to d major and the innocent simplicity of the last few bars end the opera .
a movie of the opera was made under the title " don giovanni " in 1979 directed by joseph losey .
the danish philosopher søren kierkegaard wrote a long essay in his book " enten – eller " in which he says , writing under the pseudonym of his character " a " , that " among all classic works " don giovanni " stands highest . "
mozart 's " don giovanni " is " a work without blemish , of uninterrupted perfection " .
don giovanni refuses to repent , and has been a captivating philosophical and artistic topic for many writers including george bernard shaw , who in " man and superman " parodied the opera with explicit mention of the mozart score for the finale scene between the commendatore and don giovanni domenico .
gustave flaubert called " don giovanni " , along with " hamlet " and the sea , " the three finest things god ever made . "
e . t . a . hoffmann also wrote a short story based on the opera " don juan " .
in some germanic and other languages , leporello 's " catalogue aria " gave the name " list " for concertina-folded printed matter , as used for brochures , photo albums , computer printouts and other continuous stationery .
playwright peter shaffer used " don giovanni " for a story point in his play " amadeus " .
in it , antonio salieri notices how mozart composed the opera while being tortured after the death of his imposing father leopold , and uses the information to torture mozart even further .
the long lasting popularity of " don giovanni " has resulted in extensive borrowings and arrangements of the original .
the most famous is the opera " reminiscences de don juan " by franz liszt .
the minuet from the finale of act 1 , transcribed by moritz moszkowski , also makes a small part of liszt 's fantasy on themes from mozart 's " figaro " and " don giovanni " , and sigismond thalberg uses the same minuet , along with " " , in his , op . 42 "
also makes an appearance in the klavierubung of ferruccio busoni , under the title [mask] variation study after mozarteux .
chopin wrote variations on " la ci darem la mano " duet between don giovanni and zerlinarrado for piano and orchestra .
beethoven and danzi also wrote some variations .
beethoven , in his " diabelli variations " , cites leporello 's aria " in variation 22 .
the turkishs in chabrier 's " ballade des gros dindons " opened in 1889 .
tchaikovsky always thought " don giovanni " -lrb- music by tchaikovsky -rrb- was the composer .
in 1855 , mozart 's original manuscript had been bought in london by the mezzo-soprano pauline viardot .
viardot kept the manuscript in a shrine in her paris home .
tchaikovsky visited her when he was in paris in june 1886 .
so it is surprising that the centenary of the opera in 1887 would inspire him to write something honouring mozart .
instead of taking any themes from " don giovanni " , however , he took four other works by mozart and arranged them into his fourth orchestral suite , which he called " mozartiana " .
the baritone who sang the title role in the centenary performance of " don giovanni " in prague that year was mariano padilla y ramos , the man desiree artot married instead of tchaikovsky .
in addition to some of the other works , he also appeared in a number of operas : nicklausse of offenbach 's " tales of hoffmann " sings a snatch of leporello 's " " , and rossini alludes to the commendatore 's music for selim in italia .
