march is the third month of the year and named after mars in the gregorian calendar .
it is the second of seven months to have 31 days .
in the northern hemisphere , the spring is on the first day of march .
it is the seasonal equivalent of the northern hemisphere 's march .
the letter " m " is number 1 .
the name of march comes from the roman calendar , which means " the first month " .
it was named after mars , the roman god of war .
his month " martius " was the beginning of the season for warfare , and the festivals held in his honor during the month were mirrored by others in october , when the season for these activities came to a close .
martius was the first month of the roman calendar year .
even in late antiquity , roman mosaics picturing the months sometimes put march first .
march 1 was the numbered year in russia until the end of the 15th century .
great britain and its colonies continued to use march 25 until 1752 , when they finally adopted the gregorian calendarographers .
many religions celebrate the beginning of the new year in march .
march is the first month of spring in the northern hemisphere hemisphere hemisphere hemisphere hemisphere hemisphere hemisphere hemisphere hemisphere hemisphere hemisphere hemisphere hemisphere hemisphere hemisphere hemisphere hemisphere spring spring .
ancient roman observances celebrated in march include agonium martiale , celebrated on march 1 , and march 17 , equirria , celebrated on march 14 , mamuralia , celebrated on march 14 , mamuralia , celebrated on march 14 , march 14 , and march 15 , on march 19 , and celebrated on march 17 , and march 19 , through arusta , on march 17 , and celebrated celebrated on march 17 march 19 , and celebrated on march 17 march 23 march .
these dates do not match the modern gregorian calendar .
in finnish , the month is called maaliskuu , which is believed to originate from maallinen kuu .
in ukrainian , the month is called " березень " / " [unk] " , meaning " birch tree " , and brezen in czech .
the saxon word " lentmonat " is named after the march equinox and gradual lengthening of days .
saxons also called march " rhed-monat " or " hreth-monath " from their goddess " rhedam " / " hreth " / " hreth " / " hreth " / " hreth " / " hreth " utc "dilly , and angles called it " hyld-monath " .
in slovene , the traditional name is " susec " , meaning the month when the earth becomes dry enough so that it is possible to cultivate it .
the name was first written in 1466 in the skofja loka manuscript .
other names were used too , for example " brezen " and " breznik " , " the month of birches " .
the turkish word " mart " is given after the name mars .
" this list does not necessarily imply either official status nor general observance . "
" egypt " is the state that all baha ' i , islamic , and jewish observances begin at the sundown before the date listed .
" march " by lindz from the album , newly singletify 2015orf .
