k2 , also known as mount godwin-austen or chhogori , at 8,611 metres illustrating 28,251 ft depth , is the second highest mountain in the world , after mount everest at 8,848 metres hayward .
it is on the border between baltistan in the gilgit-baltistan region of northern pakistan , and the taxkorgan tajik autonomous county of xinjiang , china .
k2 is the highest point of the karakoram range .
k2 is known as the " savage mountain " after george bell , a climber on the 1953 american expedition , told reporters " it 's a savage mountain that tries to kill you . "
one person dies for every four who reach the top .
other names for k2 are the king of mountains and the mountaineers ' mountain .
k2 is the only eight thousand meter peak that has never been climbed during the winter .
ascents have almost always been made in july and august , the warmest times of year .
the peak has been climbed by almost all of its ridges .
although the summit of everest is at a higher altitude , k2 is a more difficult and dangerous climb .
as of 2011 , only 367 people have completed the ascent .
86 people have died trying the climb .
the summit was first reached by italian climbers lino lacedelli and achille compagnoni , on the 1954 italian karakoram expedition led by ardito desio .
the name k2 came from the first survey of the great trigonometrical survey of british india .
thomas montgomerie made the first survey of the karakoram range , 130 mi to the south , and sketched the two most prominent peaks , calling them k1 and k2 .
the policy of the great trigonometrical survey was to use local names for mountains wherever possible .
k2 , however , appeared not to have a local name , possibly due to its remoteness .
the mountain is not visible from askole , the last village to the south , or from the nearest village to the north .
the name " chogori " , derived from two balti words , " chhogo " foley " snoop dogg " , " ri "nche " , " mountain " etc .
it may have been invented by western explorers .
it does form the basis for the name qogir .
other local names have been suggested including " lamba pahar " turkmenistan " in urdu openings and " dapsang " , but are not widely used .
the mountain did not have a local name , the name " mount godwin-austen " was suggested , in honor of henry godwin-austen , an early explorer of the area .
while the name was rejected by the royal geographical society , it was used on several maps and is still used for some time .
the surveyor 's mark , k2 , is still the name by which the mountain is commonly known .
it is now also used in the balti language .
the italian climber fosco maraini said that while the name of k2 owes its origin to chance , its clipped , impersonal nature is highly appropriate for so remote and challenging a mountain .
andre weil named k3 surfaces in mathematics partly after the beauty of the mountain k2 .
k2 is in the northwestern karakoram range .
it is in the baltistan region of gilgit – baltistan , pakistan , and the taxkorgan tajik autonomous county of xinjiang , china .
the tarim sedimentary basin is next to the mountain range , the mountains on the north and the lesser himalayas on the south .
melt waters from vast glaciers , such as those south and east of k2 , feed agriculture in the valleys and contribute significantly to the regional fresh water supply .
k2 is ranked 22nd by topographic prominence , a measure of a mountain 's independent stature , because it is part of the same extended area of uplift — including the karakoram , the tibetan plateau , and the himalaya bhutan mount everest .
many other mountains that are far lower than k2 are more independent in this sense .
it is , however , the most prominent peak within the karakoram range .
k2 is notable for its local relief as well as its total height .
it is over 3,000 metres above much of the ice at its base .
it is a steep pyramid , dropping quickly in almost all directions .
there it rises over 3200 m above the k2 dq qogir parapet glacier in only 3000 m of horizontal distance .
in most directions , it achieves over 2800 m of vertical relief in less than 4000 m .
a 1986 expedition led by george wallerstein made an inaccurate measurement incorrectly showing that k2 was taller than mount everest , and therefore the tallest mountain in the world .
a corrected measurement was made in 1987 , but by then the claim that k2 was the tallest mountain in the world had made it into many news reports and reference works .
the mountains of k2 and broad peak , and the area westward to the lower reaches of sarpo laggo glacier are metamorphic rocks , known as the " k2 gneiss " and part of the karakoram metamorphic complex .
the k2 gneiss is a mixture of orthogneiss and biotite-rich paragneiss .
on the south and southeast face of k2 , the orthogneiss is a mixture of a strongly foliated plagioclase-hornblende gneiss and a biotite-hornblende-k-feldspar orthogneiss , which has been intruded by garnet-mica leucranitic dikes .
in places , the paragneisses include clinopyroxene-hornblende-bearing psammites , garnetrnetodes-diopside marbles , and biotite-graphite phyllites .
near the memorial to the climbers , who have died on k2 , above base camp on the south spur , thin impure marbles with quartzites and mica schists , called the " gilkey-puchoz sequence " , are interbanded within the orthogneisses .
on the west face of broad peak and south spur of k2 , lamprophyre dikes , which consist of clinopyroxene and biotite-porphyritic vogesites and minettes , have intruded the k2 gneiss .
the k2 gneiss is separated from the surrounding sedimentary rocks of the surrounding karakoram metamorphic complex by normal faults .
for example , a fault separates the k2 gneiss of the east face of k2 from limestones and slates forming nearby skyang kangri .
ar ages of 115 to 120 million years ago obtained from and geochemical analyses of the k2 gneiss show that it is a metamorphosed , older , cretaceous , pre-collisional granite .
the granitic precursoraciolith prefecture began as the result of the production of large bodies of magma by a northward-dipping subduction zone along what was the continental margin of asia at that time and their intrusion as batholiths into its lower continental crust .
during the initial collision of the asia and indian plates , this granitic batholith was buried to depths of about 20 km or more , highly-mobile , and partially remelted during the eocene period to form gneiss .
later , the k2 gneiss was then taken over by leucogranite dikes and finally exhumed along major breakback thrust faults during post-miocene time .
erosion rates have been unable to keep pace .
the mountain was first surveyed by a european team in 1856 .
team member thomas montgomerie called the mountain k2 .
the other mountains were originally named k1 , k3 , k4 , and k5 , but were later renamed to masherbrum iv , gasherbrum ii , and gasherbrum i , respectively .
in 1892 , martin conway led a british expedition that made it to the baltoro glacier .
the first serious attempt to climb k2 was in 1902 by aleister crowley , jules jacot-guillarmod , heinrich pfannl , victor wessely , and guy knowles .
in the early 1900s , modern transportation did not exist in the region : it took fourteen days to reach the foot of the mountain .
crowley said that " neither man nor beast was injured " highlights the spirit and bravery of the attempt .
the failures were also attributed to sickness ; crowley was suffering the residual effects of malaria ; a combination of questionable physical training , personality conflicts , and poor weather conditions — of 68 days spent on k2eux at the time , the record for the longest time spent at such an altitude provided only eight clear weather .
the next attempt was not made until 1938 , when first american karakoram expedition led by charles houston made a reconnaissance of the mountain .
they concluded that the abruzzi spur was the most practical route and reached a height of around 8000 m before turning back due to diminishing supplies and the threat of bad weather .
the 1939 american karakoram expedition led by fritz wiessner came within 200 m of the summit .
charles houston returned to k2 to lead the 1953 american expedition .
the try ended in failure after a storm pinned down the team for 10 days at 7800 m .
pete schoening was taken to save almost the entire team during a mass fall .
despite the retreat and tragic end , the expedition has been given iconic status in mountaineering history .
finally , in 1954 , the italian expedition made it to the summit of k2 .
the two climbers who reached the top were lino lacedelli and achille compagnoni .
the team included a pakistani member , colonel muhammad ata-ullah , who had been a part of the 1953 american expedition .
also on the expedition were walter bonatti and pakistani hunza porter amir mehdi .
the ascent is controversial because lacedelli and compagnoni established their camp at a higher elevation than originally agreed with mehdi and bonatti .
it was too dark to ascend or descend .
bonatti and mehdi survived , but mehdi was hospitalized for months and had to have his toes amputated due to frostbite .
efforts in the 1950s to suppress these facts to protect lacedelli and compagnoni 's reputation as italian national heroes were later brought to light .
it was also said that the moving of the camp was deliberate .
bonatti was blamed for mehdi 's hospitalization .
ichiro yoshizawa led the second successful ascent , with ashraf aman as the first native pakistani climber .
the japanese expedition took the abruzzi spur .
the third ascent of k2 was in 1978 .
the top of the route went left across the east face to avoid a vertical headwall .
the summit party was made by an american team , led by james whittaker .
wickwire endured an overnight bivouac about 150 m below the summit , one of the highest bivouacs in history .
this was very emotional for the american team .
the first person to reach the summit twice was czech climber josef rakoncaj .
he was part of the 1983 italian expedition led by francesco santon .
three years later , on 5 july 1986 , he reached the summit .
the first woman to reach the summit was polish climber wanda rutkiewicz on 23 june 1986 .
liliane and maurice barrard fell during the descent .
in 1986 , two polish expeditions reached the summit of the city .
piotrowski fell to his death as the two were descending .
this latter route has never been repeated .
one climber died in the expedition .
the mountaineers died in the 2008 k2 disaster .
there are a number of routes on k2 , of somewhat different character .
the second is the propensity of the mountain to have very big storms .
the third is the steep , exposed , and committing nature of all routes on the mountain , which makes retreat more difficult , especially during a storm .
despite many attempts there have been no successful winter ascents .
all major climbing routes lie on the pakistani side , which is also where base camp is located .
the route of ascent , used far more than any other routeologies use this route route route route route is the abruzzi spur , on the pakistani side , first attempted by prince luigi amedeo , duke of the abruzzi in 1909 .
this is the southeast ridge of the peak , rising above the godwin-austen glacier .
the spur proper begins at an altitude of 5400 m .
the route follows a series of rock ribs , snow / ice fields , and some technical rock climbing on two famous features , " house 's chimney " and the " black pyramid " .
above the black pyramid , dangerously exposed and difficult to navigate slopes lead to the easily visible shoulder , and thence to the summit .
the last major obstacle is a narrow couloir known as the " bottleneck " , which places climbers dangerously close to a wall of seracs that form an ice cliff to the east of the summit .
it was partly due to the collapse of one of these seracs around 2001 that no climbers reached the peak in 2002 and 2003 .
on 1 august 2008,11 climbers from several expeditions died during a series of accidents , including several ice falls in the bottleneck .
the north ridge is almost opposite from the abruzzi spur .
it is rarely climbed , partly due to very difficult access .
the crowds of climbers and trekkers at the abruzzi basecamp , usually at most two teams are encamped below the north ridge .
this route , more technically difficult than the abruzzi , goes up a long , steep , mostly rock ridge to high on the mountain .
the first japanese ascent was the one in 1990 by greg child , greg mortimer , and steve swenson .
because 75 % of people who climb k2 use the abruzzi spur , these listed routes are rarely climbed .
no one has climbed the east face of the mountain .
for most of its climbing history k2 was not usually climbed with supplemental oxygen , and small , lightweight teams were the norm .
however , the 2004 season saw a great increase in the use of oxygen : 28 of 47 summitteers used oxygen in that year .
acclimatisation is essential when climbing without oxygen to avoid some degree of altitude sickness .
k2 's summit is well above the altitude at which high altitude pulmonary edemawyl hapecek , or high altitude cerebral edemawyl hacecececececece nationals occur .
when climbing above an altitude of 8000 m , the climber goes through the mountain .
