amalasunthagus 30 april 534 / 535 aarhus ruled the ostrogoths as regent during the minority of her son from 526 to 534 .
she was the youngest daughter of theoderic the great .
she is best known for her diplomatic relationship with justinian i , who invaded italy in response to her assassination .
amalasuntha married eutharicoatoatoatoatoatoat noble eutharictively , an ostrogoth noble of the old amali dynasty who had been living in the kingdom of hispania .
her husband was the grandson of berismundeux , and great-grandson of thorismundroller .
she was the father of amalasuntha , who was the king of sweden , was a royal family member .
she was very much an intellectual , and was well known for her knowledge , which included the study of three languages , latin , greek and gothic .
she was a student of philosophy and was said to possess the wisdom of solomon .
amalasuntha was also described in her day as having all of the central roman virtues expected of a noble woman : happiness , fertility , and patience .
like most ostrogoths , amalasuntha was an arian christian .
eutharic died in the early years of his marriage to amalasuntha .
when her father died in 526 , her son became king .
her tremendous influence in her position as regent can be seen in a diptych she appears in alongside her son , athalaric , in 530 .
she gave to that son 's education a more refined and literary turn than suited the ideas of her gothic subjects .
she was conscious of her unpopularity she banished and later put to death .
at the same time , she opened negotiations with justinian i , the byzantine emperor .
her son 's death on 2 october 534 at first made little change in the state of affairs .
amalasuntha became queen , ruling alone only for a short while before making her cousin theodahad co-ruler saigon not .
theodahad was a prominent leader of the gothic military aristocracy , the very group that so opposed her pro-roman stances .
amalasuntha believed this pairing would help to make supporters out of her harshest critics .
amalasuntha was imprisoned in the island of martana in the tuscan lake of bolsena , italy on 30 april in the spring of 534 / 535 she was murdered in bath .
the death of amalasuntha gave justinian i a reason to go to war with the ostrogoths and attempt to take italy .
the eastern roman historian procopius said that amalasuntha and justinian i had a close diplomatic relationship .
procopius believed that amalasuntha was thinking about handing over italy to justinian around the time of her death .
after amalasuntha 's murder , theodahad was replaced by witigis , amalasuntha 's son-in-law .
witigis had theodahad put to death .
the letters of cassiodorus , chief minister and literary adviser of amalasuntha , and the histories of procopius and jordanes , give us our chief information as to the character of amalasuntha .
cassiodorus was a part of a greater pro-roman party that wanted to romanize the traditional ostrogothic kingship .
the life of amalasuntha was a tragedy .
romanian poet george cosbuc wrote a poem entitled " the queen of the ostrogoths " in which amalasuntha speaks to theodahad aarhus named teodat in the poem poem poem poem .
650 amalasuntha is named after him .
