she is best known for her diplomatic relationship with justinian i , who invaded italy in response to her assassination .
amalasuntha married eutharicoatoatoatoatoatoat noble eutharictively , an ostrogoth noble of the old amali dynasty who had been living in the kingdom of hispania .
she was very much an intellectual , and was well known for her knowledge , which included the study of three languages , latin , greek and gothic .
amalasuntha was also described in her day as having all of the central roman virtues expected of a noble woman : happiness , fertility , and patience .
eutharic died in the early years of his marriage to amalasuntha .
her tremendous influence in her position as regent can be seen in a diptych she appears in alongside her son , athalaric , in 530 .
she gave to that son 's education a more refined and literary turn than suited the ideas of her gothic subjects .
she was conscious of her unpopularity she banished and later put to death .
her son 's death on 2 october 534 at first made little change in the state of affairs .
amalasuntha became queen , ruling alone only for a short while before making her cousin theodahad co-ruler saigon not .
amalasuntha was imprisoned in the island of martana in the tuscan lake of bolsena , italy on 30 april in the spring of 534 / 535 she was murdered in bath .
the death of amalasuntha gave justinian i a reason to go to war with the ostrogoths and attempt to take italy .
procopius believed that amalasuntha was thinking about handing over italy to justinian around the time of her death .
after amalasuntha 's murder , theodahad was replaced by witigis , amalasuntha 's son-in-law .
the letters of cassiodorus , chief minister and literary adviser of amalasuntha , and the histories of procopius and jordanes , give us our chief information as to the character of amalasuntha .
romanian poet george cosbuc wrote a poem entitled " the queen of the ostrogoths " in which amalasuntha speaks to theodahad aarhus named teodat in the poem poem poem poem .