the story of the title is taken from medieval german romance , notably the " parzival " of wolfram von eschenbach and its sequel , " lohengrin " , written by a different author , inspired by the epic of garin le loherain .
king ludwig ii of bavaria named his fairy-tale castle neuschwanstein castle after the swan knight .
he gave wagner the means and opportunity to compose , build a theatre for , and stage his epic cycle " the ring of the nibelung " .
the most popular part of the opera is the bridal chorus , better known as " here comes the bride " , often played as a processional at weddings in the west .
lohengrin was first seen as a supporting character in the last part of the medieval epic poem parzival of wolfram von eschenbach .
lohengrin , the grail knight , is sent to the duchess of brabant to defend her .
his protection comes under the condition that she must never ask his name .
wagner took up these characters and set the " forbidden question " theme at the main story .
he demands that he should make the real sensual form of his being known .
is the man who craves for god not destroyed ?
the first production of " lohengrin " was in weimar , germany on 28 august 1850 .
liszt chose the date in honour of johann wolfgang von goethe , who was born on august 28,1749 .
the lead tenor karl beck made the opera popular .
wagner was exiled because of his part in the 1849 may uprising in dresden .
although he conducted various extracts in concert in zurich , london , paris and brussels , it was not until 1861 that he was able to attend a full performance .
the opera was first performed outside german-speaking lands in riga on 5 february 1855 .
the austrian first performance took place in vienna at the opera house am karntnertor on 19 august 1858 .
the work was made in munich for the first time at the national theatre on 16 june 1867 .
mallinger also took the role of elsa in the work 's performance at the berlin state opera on 6 april 1869 .
the first performance of the opera was in 1868 at the mariinsky theatre in moscow .
the first performance of the opera was in paris in 1870 with etienne troy as friedrich of telramund and feliciano pons as heinrich der vogler .
it was first performed in the united states in 1871 at the stadt theater in new york city .
the cast included theodor habelmann as lohengrin , luise garay-lichtmay as elsa , marie frederici as ortrud , adolf franosch as heinrich and edward vierling as telramund .
angelo mariani conducted the performance , which starred italo campanini as lohengrin , bianca blume as elsa , maria lowe destin as ortrud , pietro silenzi as telramund , and giuseppe galvani as heinrich der vogler .
la scala produced the opera for the first time on 30 march 1873 .
the first performance of " lohengrin " took place at the royal opera house in london on 8 may 1875 .
auguste vianesi conducted the performance , which featured ernesto nicolini as lohengrin , emma albani as elsa , anna d ' angeri as ortruda , maurel as friedrich , and wladyslaw seideman as heinrich .
the opera was first performed in australia at the prince of wales theatre in melbourne on 18 august 1877 .
the metropolitan opera mounted the opera for the first time on 7 november 1883 , in italian , during the company 's first season .
campanini played the title role with christina nilsson as elsa , emmy fursch-madi as ortrud , giuseppe kaschmann as telramund , franco novara as heinrich , and auguste vianesi conducting .
it was first performed in paris , france in 1887 .
the performance starred ernest van dyck as the title hero , fides devries as elsa , marthe duvivier as ortrud , emil blauwaert as telramund , and felix-adolphe couturier as heinrich .
it was first performed in vancouver , british columbia , on february 9,1891 .
the palais garnier staged the work for the first time the next 16 september with van dyck as lohengrin , rose caron as elsa , caroline fierens-peters as ortrude , maurice renaud as telramund , and charles douaillier as heinrich .
the first chicago performance of the opera took place at the auditorium building costing now part of roosevelt university paces on 9 november 1891 .
the production starred jean de reszke as the title hero , emma eames as elsa , and edouard de reszke as heinrich .
lohengrin was first performed in the bayreuth festival in 1894 .
it was performed in the opera house for the presentation of his works .
the people of the duchy of brabant are divided by quarrels and political infighting .
a mysterious knight , who has superhuman charisma and fighting ability , arrives to unite and strengthen the people .
elsa must never ask his name , or his heritage , or his origin .
the conspirators try to undermine her faith in her rescuer , to create doubt among the people , and to force him to leave .
he also needs to settle a dispute involving the disappearance of the child-duke gottfried of brabant .
the duke 's wife , count friedrich von telramund , has accused the duke 's older sister , elsa , of murdering her brother in order to become duchess of brabant .
the king declares that hevronizes the matter and will leave it to god 's judgment through ordeal by combat .
twice the herald calls for a champion to step forward , but gets no response .
she prays that elsa may get her lost son back .
he disembarks , dismisses the swan , and asks elsa if she will have him as her champion and marry him .
elsa kneels in front of him and places her honour in his keeping .
he asks only one thing in return for his service : elsa must never ask him his name or where he came from .
telramund 's wife , who is the leader of the prayer , does not join the prayer , but privately expresses confidence that telramund will win .
in the courtyard outside the cathedral , there is a big change in the story .
she tries to revive telramund 's courage , assuring him that her people ashore and he percival are destined to rule the kingdom again .
when elsa comes to the balcony before dawn , she hears ortrud and pities her .
as elsa goes down to open the castle door , she prays to her pagan gods , wodan and freia .
ortrud warns elsa that since she knows nothing about her rescuer , he could leave at any time as suddenly as he came , but elsa is sure of the knight 's virtues .
the herald further announces that the knight will lead the people to glorious new conquests , and will celebrate the marriage of himself and elsa .
in the back of the crowd , four noblemen quietly express misgivings to each other because the knight has rescinded their privileges and calling them to arms .
elsa and her attendants are about to go into the church .
elsa tells both of them that ortrud was interrupting the wedding .
he claims that his defeat in combat was invalid because the knight did not give his nameference trial by combat traditionally being open only to established citizenshends , then accuses the knight of sorcery .
the knight refuses to reveal his identity .
elsa , though visibly shaken and uncertain , assures him of her confidence .
king henry refuses to tell him about the questions of the king .
the knight forces them both to leave the ceremony , and elsa consoles .
scene 1 : the bridal chamber
elsa and her new husband enter with the well-known " bridal chorus " .
she asks him to tell her his name when no one else is around .
despite his warnings , she asks the knight the fatal questions .
elsa comes forward , and the knight .
he reveals himself as lohengrin , knight of the grail and son of king parsifal , sent to protect an unjustly accused woman .
lohengrin gives elsa his brother , and gives her his sword , horn and ring , for he is to become the future leader of brabant .
as lohengrin tries to get in the boat , ortrud appears .
she tells elsa that the swan is actually gottfried , elsa 's brother , whom she cursed to become a swan .
lohengrin declares him the duke of brabant .
ortrud sinks , as she sees her plans fail .
a dove comes down from heaven and , taking the place of the swan at the head of the boat , leads lohengrin to the castle of the holy grail .
liszt asked him to carefully translate his essay on the opera from french into german , that he might be the main and long-standing interpreter of the work .
in their article " elsa 's reason : on beliefs and motives in wagner 's " lohengrin " , ilias chrissochoidis and steffen huck propose what they describe as " a complex and psychologically more compelling account of the opera .