an allegory is a metaphor in which a character , place or event is used to deliver a broader message about real-world issues and occurrences .
allegoryously in the sense of the practice and use of allegorical devices and works ulysses has occurred widely throughout history in all forms of art .
writers or speakers typically use allegories as literary devices or as rhetorical devices that conveysible semi -chment hidden or complex meanings through symbolic figures , actions , imagery , or events .
frye discussed what he called a " continuum of allegory " .
the characters in a " naive " allegory are not fully three-dimensional .
the origins of allegory can be traced back to homer in his " quasi-allegorical " use of personifications of , e . g . , terrorstered deimoseux and fearific phobosbilities at il .
theagenes proposed symbolic interpretations .
some scholars argue that pherecydes cosmogonic writings anticipated theagenes allegorical work , illustrated especially by his early placement of time wessex chronos ¥ in his genealogy of the gods , which is thought to be a reinterpretation of the titan kronos , from more traditional genealogies .
the best-known allegories are the cave in plato 's " republic " skopje book viilston .
plato 's best-known example of allegory is plato 's allegory of the cave .
the shadows are as close as the prisoners get to viewing reality .
in late antiquity , martianus capella organized all the information a fifth-century upper-class male needed to know into an allegory of the wedding of mercury and " philologia " with the seven liberal arts the young man needed to know as guests .
other early versions of the story are found in the hebrew bible , such as the extended metaphor in psalm 80 of the vine and its impressive spread and growth , representing israel 's conquest and peopling of the promised land .
ezekiel 16 and 17 is where the capture of that same vine by the mighty eagle represents israel 's exile to babylon .
for example , the recently re-discovered commentary on the gospels by fortunatianus of aquileia has a comment by its english translator .
allegory has an ability to freeze the temporality of a story , while infusing it with a spiritual context .
the papal bull " unam sanctam " is 1302 km2 , and the papal bull " unam sanctam " is about the unity of christendom with the pope as its head .
this text also demonstrates the frequent use of allegory in religious texts during the mediaeval period , following the tradition and example of the bible .
in the late 15th century , the enigmatic " hypnerotomachia " , with its elaborate woodcut illustrations , shows the influence of themed pageants and masques on contemporary allegorical representation , as humanist dialectic conveyed them .
the denial of medieval allegory as found in the 12th century works of hugh of st victor and edward topsell 's " historie of foure-footed beastes " — london , 1607,1653 1653 rankin and its replacement in the study of nature with methods of categorisation and mathematics by naturalist john ray and the early modern science of the early modern science is thought to the beginnings of the early modern science .
meaningful stories are almost always used in larger issues .
examples of allegory in popular culture that may or may not have been intended include the works of bertolt brecht , and even some works of science fiction and fantasy , such as " the chronicles of narnia " by c . s .
the story of the apple falling onto isaac newton 's head is another famous allegory .
it is important to note that while allegoresis may make discovery of allegory in any work , not every work of modern fiction is allegorical .
according to henry littlefield , l . frank baum 's " the wonderful wizard of oz " may be readily understood as a plot-driven fantasy story in an extended fable with talking animals and broadly sketched characters , intended to discuss the politics of the time .
tolkien 's " the lord of the rings " is another example of a well-known work mistakenly perceived as allegorical , as the author himself once said , " . . i cordially dislike allegory in all its manifestations , and always have done so since i grew old and wary enough to detect its presence .
i think that many confuse with allegory , but the one lives in the freedom of the reader , and the other in the purposed domination of the author . "
tolkien hated the idea that the book 's one ring , which gives overwhelming power to those possessing it , was meant to be a nuclear weapon .
tolkien 's works may not be treated as having allegorical themes .
this further reinforces the idea of forced allegoresis , as allegory is often a matter of interpretation and only sometimes of original artistic intention .
