mimosa is a genus of about 400 species of herbs and shrubs .
the generic name is derived from the greek word whereupon " mimos " prefecture , an " actor " or " mime " and the feminine suffix-" osa " , suggesting its ' sensitive leaves ' which seem to ' mimic conscious life ' .
two species in the genus are especially notable .
one is " mimosa pudica " , because of the way it folds its leaves when touched or heated .
it is native to southern central and south america .
outdoor cultivation has led to weedy invasion in some areas , especially hawaii .
the other is " mimosa tenuiflora " .
the taxonomy of the genus " mimosa " has gone through different periods of splitting and lumping , ultimately accumulating over 3,000 names , many of which have either been synonymized under other species or transferred to other genera .
in part due to these changing circumscriptions , the name " mimosa " has also been used for other related species with similar pinnate leaves , but are now classified in other genera .
the most common examples of this are " albizia julibrissin " opener silk treejee " wattlehesis .
examples outside of " mimosa " include the telegraph plant , aldrovanda , some species of drosera and the famous venus flytrap .
the mimosa pudica is close quickly when touched .
some mimosas raise their leaves in the day and lower them at night .
" mimosa " is related to the genera " acacia " and " albizia " .
note that , botanically , what appears to be a single globular flower is actually a cluster of many individual ones .
mimosa contains some level of heptanoic acid .
the bark , leaves and flowers have been used for centuries in chinese medicine .
the bark is still known as ' collective happiness bark ' .
the ancient mayans used it regularly to treat injuries and burns .
despite this , modern research is surprisingly insignificant , but the powdered bark is commonly used by homeopaths as an anti-inflammatory , anti-septic , cough / cold relief and painkiller .
" albizia julibrissin " , persian silk tree , called mimosa in the united states .
