may is the fifth month of the year in the gregorian calendar .
may is a spring month in the northern hemisphere and autumn in the southern hemisphere .
in each hemisphere , it is the seasonal equivalent of november in the other .
late may is the summer vacation season in the united states and canada that ends on labor day , the first monday of september .
the month of maycastle in latin , " maius "ɬ was named for the greek goddess maia , who was the roman goddess of fertility , bona dea , whose festival was held in may .
he says that the month of may is named for the " maiores , " latin for " elders " .
mayovka was a picnic in the countryside .
eventually , " proletarian mayovka "culture came to mean an illegal celebration of may 1 by revolutionary public .
special devotions to the virgin mary take place in may .
see may devotions to the blessed virgin mary .
eta aquariids meteor shower appears in may .
it is visible from about 21 april to about may 20 .
the arietids shower from may 22 – july 2 , and peaks on june 7 .
the virginids also shower at various dates in may .
the festival of bona dea was celebrated on may 14 , and may 15 , when it was celebrated on may 15 .
floralia was held april 27 during the republican era , or april 28 on the julian calendar , and lasted until may 3 .
lemuria ( festival blindness fell on 9,11 , and 13 may under the julian calendar .
the college of aesculapius and hygia celebrated two festivals of rosaliattered festival [mask] , one on may 11 and one on may 22 .
rosalia was celebrated at pergamon on may 24-26 .
a military rosalia festival , rosaliae signorum , also took place on may 31 .
ludi fabarici was celebrated on may 29 .
mercury would receive a sacrifice on the ides of mayopus .
tubilustrium took place on may 23 as well as march .
these dates do not match the modern gregorian calendar .
may 6 – 7 fourth sunday after easter : may 17 third sunday of may : may 19 , tuesday , tuesday , and saturday after may 29 – 39 days after divine mercy sunday .
wednesday after pascha : may 2 , may 3 after pascha : may 4 , may 4 after pascha : may 4 , may 4,3rd tuesday of pascha , or 2nd monday of pascha , depending on region : may 6 or may 7 2nd sunday following pascha : may 29 after may 29 , after the sunday of may 29 .
