it was released to major acclaim .
reviewers liked the interactivity of the environments , gameplay , level design , and unique risque humor .
the " plutonium pak " , an expansion pack which updated the game to version 1.4 and added a fourth 11-level episode , was released in november 1996 .
the " atomic edition " , a standalone version of the game that included the content from the " plutonium pak " and updated the game to version 1.5 , was later released .
as a first-person shooter whose gameplay is similar to " doom " , the gameplay of " duke nukem 3d " involves moving through levels presented from the player 's point of view , shooting enemies on the way .
the player controls the game , which is highly destructible and interactive .
levels were designed in a fairly non-linear manner such that players can advantageously use air ducts , back doors , and sewers to avoid enemies or find hidden hidden caches .
the player can quote water fountains and broken hydrants .
the duke has a basic kick attack , a pistol , a shotgun , a triple barrelled chain gun , a rocket-propelled grenade launcher , pipe-bombs , freeze and shrink rays , laser land mines , and the rapid fire " devastator " rocket launcher .
there is also an extra weapon known as the " expander " , the opposite of the shrink-ray weapon , which is only available in the " atomic edition " version of the game .
steroids make the player move faster , as well as changing the effects of the shrink-ray .
the lapd have been turned into " pig cops " , a play on the derogatory term " pig " for police officers , with lard emblazoned on their uniforms .
as usual for a first-person shooter , duke nukem encounters a large number of lesser foes , as well as bosses , usually at the end of episodes .
" duke nukem 3d " did not support the tcp / ip client / server model , instead based its network play on the ipx lan , modem or serial cable .
" duke nukem 3d " players often battled modem-to-modem , using the ipx network utility kali or the total entertainment network athlete athlete athlete online pay service .
" duke nukem 3d " was one of the most popular games on the internet before it was closed in 1999 .
" duke nukem 3d " 's levels were often used as the battlegrounds for these encounters , and users were able to create their own levels , or maps , using the level editor bundled with the game , which was also used by the developers to design the levels .
in " duke nukem 3d : atomic edition " , a new game mode was introduced : duke tag , a " capture the flag " style mode .
all five offer the original visual appearance of the game , while " eduke32 " also supports opengl rendering .
eduke32 is in a state of development hell .
the levels of " duke nukem 3d " take players outdoors and indoors .
people will see the figures of famous characters such as luke skywalker , indiana jones , snake plissken , the protagonist of " doom " , and a smashed t-800 .
in the first episode , the player has to travel through the wall of a prison cell hidden behind a poster , just like in " the shawshank redemption " .
during the second episode , players can see the moon from " gaston " .
there is very little story in the game , only a short text prelude in the main menu , and a few cutscenes after the completion of an episode .
the game picks up right after the events of " duke nukem ii " .
while sending a distress signal , duke learns that aliens are attacking los angeles and have mutated the lapd .
at a strip club , he is captured by pig-cops .
duke learns that the aliens were capturing women .
levels in this episode include a movie theater , a red light district , a prison , and a nuclear waste disposal facility .
in " episode two : " lunar apocalypse " , the player goes to space .
as duke inspects the ship 's computer , it is revealed that the plot to capture women was merely a ruse to distract him .
in " shrapnel city " , the player fights the massive alien resistance through los angeles once again , and kills the leader of the alien menace : the cycloid emperor .
in " the birth " episode , it is revealed that the aliens used a captured woman to give birth to the alien queen , a creature which quickly spawn deadly alien protector drones .
duke is sent back to los angeles to fight aliens .
levels in this episode include a fast-food restaurant named duke burger , a supermarket , a disneyland parody called " babe land , " a police station , the exxon valdez , and area 51 .
in " episode five : " alien world order " , duke finds out that the aliens initiated a world-scale invasion , so he sets out to repel their attack on various countries .
at one point , the game was being programmed to allow the player to change between first person view , third-person view , and fixed camera angles .
scott miller of 3d realms recalled that " with duke 3d " , unlike every shooter that came before , we wanted to have sort of real life locations like a cinema theatre , you know , strip club , bookstores . . . . "
lameduke is a beta version of " duke nukem 3d " .
it was released as a single in 2008 .
lee jackson 's theme song " grabbag " has been featured many spin-offs and remixes over the years by both fans and professional musicians .
it was released on the front page of their website .
jeffrey d . erb and mark farish of intersphere communications ltd .
" duke nukem 3d " was released on the nintendo ds .
all of the ports featured some sort of new content .
after the " doom " source code in 1997 , gamers wanted a similar source code release from 3d realms .
the programmer , matthew saettler , got permission from 3d realms to expand the gameplay enhancements done on " wwii gi " to " duke nukem 3d " .
though a further version was planned , it never made it out of beta .
about a month after the release of the " duke nukem 3d " source code , " blood " project manager matt saettler released the source code for eduke v2.1 and eduke v2.1 , the test version of which would have become the next " eduke " release , under the gpl .
the source code to the " duke nukem 3d " v1.5 executable , which uses the build engine , was released as free software under the gpl on april 1,2003 .
the game was quickly ported to modern operating systems .
another popular project was jonathon fowler 's " jfduke3d " , which , in december 2003 , received backing from the original author of build , programmer ken silverman .
fowler , in cooperation with silverman , released a new version of jfduke3d using polymost , an opengl-enhanced renderer for build .
silverman has helped fowler with a lot of other software work , including the network code , and helping to maintain various other aspects of the engine .
while a few short-lived dos-lived " eduke " projects emerged , it was not until the release of eduke32 , an extended version of " duke3d " .
support for advanced shader model 3.0 based graphics was added to eduke32 during late 2008-early 2009 .
eduke32 became the only " duke nukem 3d " source to compile and run natively on 64-bit linux systems without the use of a 32-bit compatibility environment .
on april 1,2009 , an opengl shader model 3.0 renderer was revealed to have been developed for eduke32 named " polymer " to distinguish from ken silverman 's " polymost " .
as of the fifth installment of the " high resolution pack " , released in 2011 , the polymer renderer is mandatory .
in 2011 , another significant development of eduke32 was the introduction of true room over room managers .
this allows for real three-dimensional level design that was previously impossible , although the base engine is still 2d .
inspired by " chocolate doom " , the main goal was to use the code so that developers would easily read and learn from it .
in 2013 , a source code review article was published that described the internal working of the code .
he cited the game 's speed and fluidity even on low-end pcs , imaginative weapons , varied and identifiable environments , true 3d level designs , and strong multiplayer mode .
reviewers liked the sexual content of the game .
the game revolution reviewer said that it was " done in a tongue-in-cheek manner , " and he was " not personally offended " .
gamingonlinux reviewer hamish paul wilson commented in a later retrospective how the game 's " dark dystopian atmosphere filled with pornography and consumerist decadence " in his view helped to ground " the game 's more outlandish and obscene moments in context " , concluding that " in a world as perverse as this , someone like duke becoming almost inevitable . "
" next generation " reviewed the macintosh version of the game , and said that " though it took a year , the mac port of duke nukem 3d " is impressive feat , both for the game 's own features , and the quality of the port . "
" next generation " rated the nintendo 64 out of five and said that " the sound effects and music are solid , the levels are still interactive as heck , and it 's never quite felt so good blasting with a shotgun or blowing them to chunks with pipe bombs " .
in 1996 , " next generation " ranked it as the 35th top game of all time .
in 1998 , " pc gamer " said it was the 29th best computer game ever released .
the editors of " pc game " said it was the 12th top game of all time in 2001 .
gamepro has been ranked among the most important video games of all time .
in 2009 , ign 's cam shea said it was as the ninth top 10 xbox live arcade game .
some critics said that it was pornography and murder .
she was criticized for being extremely harmful to young women .
3d realms repackaged the game with the parental lock feature permanently enabled , although a patch available on the 3d realms website allowed the user to revert the game back into its uncensored u . s . version .
six months later , the game was released uncensored with an ma15 rating .
in germany , the bpjm placed the game on their " list of media harmful to young people " .
however , it was not taken , meaning that an adult could still request to see the game and buy it .
in 1999 , " duke nukem 3d " was banned in brazil .
despite such concerns from critics , legislators , and publishers , scott miller later said that 3d realms saw very little negative feedback to the game 's controversial elements from actual gamers or their parents .
he said that " duke nukem 3d " was appropriately rated " m " and had no real nudity .
