article six of the united states constitution creates the laws and treaties of the united states .
the first clause of the article says that debts of the constitution are still valid , as they were under the articles of confederation .
clause two says that the constitution , federal laws made by it , and treaties made under its authority constitute the supreme law of the land .
it first said that it had the power to review the decisions of state courts allegedly in conflict with the supreme law , claims of " state sovereignty " notwithstanding .
in " martin v . hunter 's lessee "ziernick , the supreme court ruled that the state supreme court had ruled unconstitutional .
the supreme court has also struck down attempts by states to control or direct the affairs of federal institutions .
the state of maryland had a tax on banks not chartered by the state .
marshall wrote that " the states have no power , by taxation or otherwise , to retard , impede , burden , or in any manner control , the operations of the constitutional laws enacted by congress to carry into execution the powers vested in the general government . "
the state of new york had given aaron ogden a monopoly over the steamboat business in the hudson river .
thomas gibbons got a federal permit under the coastal licensing act to perform the same task .
the right to the constitution gives the same power to laws and treaties .
in every such case , the act of congress , or the treaty , is supreme ; and the law of the state , though enacted in the exercise of powers not controverted , must yield to it . "
" reid v . covert " ruled that no branch of the united states government can have powers given to it by treaty that have not been given by the united states constitution .
the third clause is bound by oath or affirmation to support the constitution .
the supreme court found that the law was unconstitutional " ex post facto " law .
during the 1960 presidential campaign , the issue of whether the nation would for the first time elect a catholic to the highest office in the land raised the specter of an implicit , but no less effective , religious test .
