writing is a medium of human communication .
for languages that use a writing system , inscriptions can complement spoken language by creating a durable version of speech that can be stored for future reference or transmitted across distance .
writing is a language used to make languages readable .
in a language system , writing is based on many of the same things as speech , such as grammar , and semantics .
the recipient of text is called a " reader " .
h . g . wells argued that writing has the ability to " put agreements , laws , commandments on record .
it made the growth of states bigger than the old city states possible .
it made a continuous historical consciousness possible .
the priest or king could go far beyond his sight and voice and could survive his death .
as human societies emerged , collective motivations for the development of writing were driven by pragmatic exigencies like keeping history , maintaining culture , codifying knowledge through curricula and lists of texts deemed to contain foundational knowledge through curricula .
for example , around the 4th millennium bc , the complexity of trade and administration in mesopotamia outgrew human memory , and writing became a more dependable method of recording and presenting transactions in a permanent form .
in both ancient egypt and mesoamerica , writing may have evolved through calendric and political necessities .
the proper sequence for a complicated task or important ritually , dissemination of ideas as in an essay , monograph , broadside , petition , manifesto , or other forms of lifewriting , a journal or organization of correspondence , is also present .
the major writing systems — methods of inscription — broadly fall into five categories : logographic , syllabic , alphabetic , featural , and ideographic symbols for ideashend .
a sixth category , pictographic , is not to be used to represent language on its own , but often forms the core of logographicies .
a logogram is a written symbol that represents a word or morpheme .
there is a vast number of logograms needed to write chinese characters , cuneiform , and mayan , where a glyph may stand for a morpheme , a syllable , or both .
many logograms have an ideographic component representing chinese " radicals " , hieroglyphic " determiners " goin " elsewhere .
for example , in mayan , the glyph for fin was also used to represent the syllable " ka " whenever the pronunciation of a logogram needed to be written .
in chinese , about 90 % of characters are compounds of a semantically meaning radical element called a " phonetic " with an existing character to show the pronunciation , called a " phonetic " .
however , such phonetic elements complement the logographic elements , rather than vice versa .
the main logographic system in use today is chinese characters .
a syllabary is a set of written symbols that represent floating or approximate syllables .
a glyph in a syllabary typically represents a consonant followed by a vowel , or just a vowel alone .
phonetically related syllables are not in the script .
for instance , the syllable " ka " may look nothing like the syllable " ki " , nor will syllables with the same vowels be similar .
syllabaries are best suited to languages with a relatively simple syllable structure , such as japanese .
other languages that use syllabic writing include the linear b script for mycenaean greek ; sequoyan , ndjuka , an english-based creole language of surinam ; and the vai script of liberia .
most logographic systems have a strong syllabic component .
ethiopic , though technically an abugida , has fused consonants and vowels together to the point where it is learned as if it were a syllabary .
an alphabet is a set of symbols .
in a perfectly phonological alphabet , the phonemes and letters would correspond perfectly in two directions : a writer could predict the spelling of a word given its pronunciation , and a speaker could predict the pronunciation of a word given its pronunciation .
as languages often evolve independently of their writing systems , and writing systems have been borrowed for languages they were not designed for .
in most of the writing systems of the middle east , it is usually only the consonants of a word that are written , although vowels may be added by adding different letters .
writing systems based primarily on marking the consonant phonemes alone date back to the hieroglyphs of ancient egypt .
such systems are called " abjads " , derived from the arabic word for alphabet .
in most of the alphabets of india and southeast asia , vowels are indicated through diacritics or modification of the shape of the consonant .
these are called " abugidas " .
some are learned by children as syllabaries .
however , unlike true syllabaries , there is not an independent glyph for each syllable .
sometimes the word " alphabet " is used only for consonants and vowels .
because of this use , greek is often considered to be the first alphabet .
it does not make a consistent way the building blocks of the phonemes that make up a language .
for instance , all sounds pronounced with the lipstively " labial " sounds may have some element in common .
in the latin alphabet , this is accidentally the case with the letters " b " and " p " .
in korean hangul , all four labial consonants are based on the same basic element .
signwriting is the most used writing system for many sign languages .
featural scripts are common in fictional or invented systems , such as j . r . tolkien 's tengwar .
historians draw a sharp distinction between prehistory and history , with history defined by the advent of writing .
cave paintings and petroglyphs of prehistoric peoples are considered precursors of writing , but they are not considered true writing because they did not represent language directly .
writing systems develop and change based on the needs of the people who use them .
sometimes the shape , orientation , and meaning of individual signs changes over time .
it is possible to learn about the needs of the people who used the script as well as how the script changed over time .
the many tools and writing materials used throughout history are : stone tablets , clay tablets , bamboo slats , papyrus , wax tablets , vellum , parchment , paper , copperplate , stylus , quills , ink brushes , pencils , pens , and many styles of lithography .
the incas used knotted cords known as quipurwood or khipurford for keeping records .
the typewriter and various forms of word processors have subsequently become widespread writing tools .
while neolithic writing is a current research topic , conventional history assumes that the writing process first evolved from economic necessity in the ancient near east .
writing most likely began as a consequence of political expansion in ancient cultures , which needed reliable means for transmitting information , keeping historical records , and similar activities .
around the 4th millennium bc , the complexity of trade and administration outgrew the power of memory , and writing became a more dependable method of recording and presenting transactions in a permanent form .
the first writing systems came from the bronze age .
the sumerian archaic cuneiform script and the egyptian hieroglyphs are generally considered the earliest writing systems .
it is generally agreed that sumerian writing was an independent invention .
archaeologist denise schmandt-besserat found the link between previously uncategorized clay " tokens " , the oldest of which have been found in the zagros region of iran , and the first known writing , mesopotamian cuneiform .
in about 8000 bc , the mesopotamians began using clay tokens to count their agricultural and manufactured goods .
later they began placing these tokens inside large , hollow clay containers depicting bulla .
the quantity of tokens in each container came to be expressed by impressing , on the container 's surface , one picture for each instance of the token inside .
they next dispensed with the tokens , using symbols for the tokens , drawn on clay surfaces .
to avoid making a picture for each instance of the same object cubic inch , for example : 100 pictures of a hat to represent 100 hatsigraphy , they ' counted ' the objects by using various small marks .
in this way the sumerians added " a system for enumerating objects to their incipient system of symbols " .
the original mesopotamian writing system was developed around 3200 bc from this method of keeping accounts .
triangular marks were pressed into soft clay tablets .
this system was gradually augmented with using a sharp stylus to show what was being counted by means of pictographs .
round-stylus and sharp-stylus writing was gradually replaced by writing using a wedge-shaped stylusylusylushesis .
around 2700 bc , cuneiform began to represent syllables of spoken sumerian .
later , mesopotamian cuneiform became a general purpose writing system for writing words , syllables , and numbers .
this script was adapted to another mesopotamian language , the east semitic akkadian lilith assyrian and babylonian whistled around 2600 bc , and then to others such as hattian , hurrian and hittite .
scripts similar in appearance to this writing system include those for ugaritic and old persian .
old aramaic was also adapted to mesopotamian cuneiform .
the last cuneiform scripts in akkadian discovered so far date from the first century ad .
the earliest known hieroglyphic date back to the second half of the 4th millennium bc , such as the clay labels of a predynastic ruler called " scorpion i " .
the hieroglyphic script was logographic with phonetic adjuncts that included an effective alphabet .
the world 's oldest deciphered sentence was found in the tomb of seth-peribsen at umm el-qa ' ab , which dates from the second dynasty egyptologist 8th to 27th century bc .
there are around 800 hieroglyphs dating back to the old kingdom , middle kingdom and new kingdom eras .
by the greco-roman period , there are more than 5,000 people .
writing was very important in maintaining the egyptian empire .
only people from certain backgrounds were allowed to train to become scribes .
the hieroglyph system was always difficult to learn , but in later centuries was purposely made even more so , as this preserved the scribes status .
the world 's oldest known alphabet appears to have been developed by canaanite turquoise miners in the sinai desert around the mid-19th century bc .
there are many inscriptions on the clay of the egyptian language , about 30 million years ago .
this site was also home to a temple of hathor , the " mistress of turquoise " .
a later , two line inscriptions have also been found at wadi el-hol in central egypt .
based on hieroglyphic prototypes , but also including entirely new symbols , each sign seems to stand for a consonant rather than a word .
it was not until the 12th to 9th centuries , however , that the alphabet became widely used .
over the centuries , there were three different elamite scripts .
proto-elamite is the oldest known writing system from iran .
clay tablets with proto-elamite writing have been found at different sites across iran .
the proto-elamite script developed from early cuneiformiformiformiformiformiformiformiformiformiformiformiformiformiformitions .
the proto-elamite script has more than 1,000 signs and is thought to be partly logographic .
linear elamite is a writing system in a few monumental inscriptions in iran .
it was used for a brief period during the last quarter of the 3rd millennium bc .
linear elamite is a syllabic writing system derived from proto-elamite .
several scholars have attempted to decipher the script , most notably and .
the elamite cuneiform script was used from about 2500 to 331 bc .
there are about 130 symbols , far fewer than most other cuneiform script .
cretan hieroglyphs are found on artifacts of crete during the 2nd millennium bc , mm i to mm iii .
linear b , the writing system of the mycenaean greeks , has been deciphered while linear a has yet to be deciphered .
cretan hieroglyphs were used in crete from c . 1625 to 1500 bc .
the earliest surviving examples of writing in china date from around 1200 bc in the late shang dynasty .
a small number of bronze inscriptions from the same period have also survived .
historians have found that the type of media used had an effect on what the writing was documenting and how it was used .
in 2003 , archaeologists found isolated tortoise-shell carvings from the 7th millennium bc , but whether or not these symbols are related to the characters of the later oracle-bone script is disputed .
indus script refers to short strings of symbols associated with the indus valley civilization .
in spite of many tries at decipherments and claims , it is as uniphered .
the term ' indus script ' is mainly used for that used in the mature harappan phase .
it is written from right to left .
since the number of principal signs is about 400 – 600 , many scholars accept the script to be logo-syllabic scripts have about 50 – 100 signs .
several scholars maintain that structural analysis suggests that an agglutinative language underlies the script .
in 2001 , archaeologists found that there was a civilization in central asia that used writing .
an excavation near ashgabat , the capital of turkmenistan , revealed an inscription on a piece of stone that was used as a stamp seal .
the proto-sinaitic script is found in egypt , north america , and south asia .
the phoenician writing system was adapted from the proto-canaanite script sometime before the 14th century bc .
the writing system was an odd sort of syllabary in which only consonants are written .
the script was adapted by the greeks , who adapted certain consonantal signs to represent their vowels .
the cumae alphabet is a form of the early greek alphabet .
other languages that use the greek alphabet include cyrillic , used to write the bulgarian language , russian and serbian language .
the aramaic script is also used in the phoenician language .
the tifinagh script is descended from the libyco-berber script .
a stone slab with 3,000-year-old writing , known as the cascajal block , was discovered in the mexican state of veracruz .
it is thought to be olmec .
the only one to be deciphered is the maya script .
the earliest written document recognized as maya dates to the 3rd century bc .
maya writing used logograms with a set of syllabic glyphs , somewhat similar in function to modern japanese writing .
the incas had no known script .
their quipu system of recording information was apparently used for inventory and accountancy purposes .
stone slabs were found in the mid-20th centuryference of the tartariatify area of transylvania , romania , ancient land of dacia , inhabited by dacia .
one of the slabs has 4 groups of pictographs divided by lines .
some of the characters are also found in ancient greek , as well as in etruscan , old italic and iberian .
the origin and the timing of the writings are disputed .
there are indirect carbon dates found near the slabs .
in many parts of the world , writing has become more important in daily life as digital technologies have helped connect people from across the globe through e-mail and social media .
such technologies have brought substantial amounts of routine reading and writing into most modern workplaces .
in the united states , for example , the ability to read and write is necessary for most jobs .
for example , the emergence of the writing center and community-wide literacy councils aim to help students and community members sharpen their writing skills .
these resources span across different age groups in order to offer each individual a better understanding of their language and how to express themselves by writing in order to perhaps improve their socioeconomic status .
other parts of the world have seen an increase in writing abilities as a result of programs such as the world literacy foundation and the international literacy foundation .
