christopher houston carson — december 24,1809 – may 23,1868 1868 — better known as kit carson , was an american frontiersman .
he was a mountain man whose job was to live in the desert .
carson became a frontier legend in his own lifetime .
his exploits were the subject of dime novels .
his understated nature belied and confirmed reports of his fearlessness , combat skills , tenacity , and profound effect on the westward expansion of the united states .
carson left home in present-day missouri at age 16 to become a mountain man and trapper in the west .
in the 1830s , he accompanied ewing young on an expedition to mexican california and joined fur-trapping expeditions into the rocky mountains .
he lived among the arapaho and cheyenne tribes .
in the 1840s , carson was hired as a guide by john c . fremont .
fremont 's expeditions covered much of california , oregon , and the great basin area .
fremont mapped and wrote reports and commentaries on the oregon trail to help and encourage westward-bound american pioneers .
carson became famous through fremont 's accounts of his trips .
under fremont 's command , carson took control of the mexican-american war .
later in the war , carson was a scout and courier .
in the 1850s , he was appointed as the indian agent to the ute indians and the jicarilla apaches .
carson led a group of men from new mexico on the side of the union at valverde in 1862 .
carson led forces to suppress the navajo , mescalero apache , and the kiowa and comanche peoples .
carson was made a brigadier general .
he was there only briefly : poor health forced him to retire from military life .
carson was married three times and had ten children .
carson 's home was in taos , new mexico .
carson died on may 23,1868 in fort lyon , colorado from an aortic aneurysm , aged 85 .
he is buried in taos , new mexico .
carson was born on christmas eve 1809 at the home of thomas young in iredell county , north carolina .
his parents were lindsay carson and his second wife , rebecca robinson .
he had five children with his first wife , lucy bradley .
christopher " kit " houston carson 's birth was an interesting experience .
thomas young and his family had a family tradition to celebrate christmas by having a party at their fashionable home in houstonville .
carson 's family would always invite friends and close neighbors .
lindsay and rebecca carson were invited to this meeting .
his wife , rebecca , was expecting the imminent birth of their 6th child .
early in the evening , the hostess , mrs . young , noticed that rebecca carson seemed to be in some distress and knowing of her expectant child , mrs . young took rebecca to a room in another building where she could be in a better environment .
it was not long until the sound of a new pair of strong lungs sounded out the alarm , a new child had been born to lindsay and rebecca carson .
the new mother and father decided that their son should be named christopher houston carson , and because of his small size , to give him the nick-name , " kit . "
carson had a scottish presbyterian background .
he was a farmer , a cabin builder , and a veteran of the american revolutionary war and the war of 1812 .
he fought indians on the american frontier .
the carson family moved to boone 's lick , howard county , missouri when kit was about one year old .
the family settled on a tract of land owned by the sons of daniel boone .
the boone and carson families became good friends , working and socializing together , and intermarrying .
his son , william boone , was his cousin .
kit 's daughter adaline became kit 's favorite playmate .
missouri was then the frontier of american expansionism west .
as men worked in the fields , sentries were posted with weapons , to protect the farmers .
these men were ready to kill any native american who attacked .
< carson wrote in his " memoirs " : " for two or three years after our arrival , we had to remain forted and it was necessary to have men stationed at the extremities of the fields for the protection of those that were laboring .
in 1818 , lindsay carson died .
kit was about 8 years old .
despite being very poor , his mother took care of her children alone for four years .
she was married to joseph martin from 1945 until his death in 2006 .
kit was a boy at the time of his life .
his apprentice was to david workman , a saddle maker in franklin , missouri .
kit wrote in his " memoirs " that workman was " a good man , and i often recall the kind treatment i received . "
franklin was at the eastern end of the santa fe trail , which had opened two years earlier .
many of the customers at the saddle shop were trappers and traders .
carson found work in the saddlery not to his taste : he once said " the business did not suit me , and i concluded to leave " .
in august 1826 , he ran away from his mother 's home .
he went west with a caravan of fur trappers , tending their livestock .
they traveled over the santa fe trail to santa fe , the capital of santa fe de nuevo mexico .
kit settled in taos .
carson lived with his family in the war of 1812 .
carson learned the skills of a trapper , while learning the necessary languages for trade .
eventually he became fluent in spanish and several indian languages .
workman put an advertisement in a local newspaper back in missouri .
he gave a one cent reward to anyone who brought the boy back to franklin .
no one claimed the reward .
carson was free .
the advertisement featured the first printed description of carson : " christopher carson , a boy about sixteen years old , but thick set ; light hairs , ran away from the subscriber , living in franklin , howard county , missouri , to whom he had been bound to learn the saddler 's trade . "
between 1827 and 1829 , carson worked as cook , translator , and wagon driver in the southwest .
he also worked at a copper mine near the gila river in southwestern new mexico .
in later life , carson never said any women from his youth .
there are only three specific women mentioned in his writing : josefa jaramillo , his third and last wife , a comrade 's mother in washington , dc ; and mrs . ann white , a victim of indian atrocities .
carson began his career as a mountain man .
he traveled through many parts of the american west with famous mountain men like jim bridger and old bill williams .
he spent the winter of 1828-1829 as a cook for ewing young in taos .
in 1829 , young went on his expedition to collect plants .
young is credited with shaping carson 's early life in the mountains .
in 1829 the party went into apache country along the gila river .
the expedition was attacked .
young 's party went into alta california trapping and trading in california from sacramento in the north to los angeles in the south , returning to taos , new mexico in april 1830 .
carson joined a wagon train rescue party after entering taos .
carson joined another expedition led by thomas fitzpatrick in 1831 .
fitzpatrick , levin and his trappers went north to the central rocky mountains .
carson would hunt and trap in the west for about ten years .
he was known as a reliable man and a good fighter .
a mountain man was not easy to live .
after collecting beavers from traps , he held them for months at a time until the yearly rocky mountain rendezvous .
with the money received for the pelts , they could not get fish hooks , flour and tobacco .
carson had to dress his wounds and himself .
conflict with particular native americans sometimes occurred .
carson 's primary clothing was in deer skins that had stiffened after being left outdoors for a time .
this suit was given protection against particular weapons used by native americans .
grizzly bears were one of the mountain man 's greatest enemies .
carson wrote about the animals that he was hunting an elk alone .
two grizzly bears chased him up a tree .
one bear tried to make him fall by shaking the tree , but was not successful and finally went away .
carson returned to his camp as fast as he could .
he wrote in his " memoirs " that " the bear finally concluded to leave , of which i was heartily pleased , never having been so scared in my life . "
the last rendezvous was held in 1840 .
the fur trade began to drop off .
fashionable men in london , paris , and new york wanted silk hats instead of beaver hats .
beaver populations across north america were declining rapidly from over-exploitation .
carson knew it was time to find other work .
he wrote in his " memoirs " that beaver was getting scarce , it became necessary to try our hand at something else . "
in 1841 , he was hired at bent 's fort in colorado .
hundreds of people worked or lived there .
carson hunted buffalo , antelope , deer , and other animals to feed these people .
he was paid one dollar .
he returned to bent 's fort several times during his life to provide meat for the fort 's residents .
carson was nineteen when he set off with ewing young 's expedition to the rocky mountains in 1829 .
in addition to furs and the company of free-spirited , rugged mountain men , carson sought action and adventure .
carson found much pleasure in killing native americans .
carson probably killed and took the scalp of his first native american when he was nineteen years old , during ewing young 's expedition .
carson 's " memoirs " are replete with stories about native american encounters with the memoir writer .
in january 1833 , for example , warriors of the crow tribe stole nine horses from carson 's camp .
carson and two other men sprayed the crow camp with gunfire , killing almost every crow .
carson wrote in his " memoirs " : " during our pursuit for the lost animals , we suffered considerably but , the success of having recovered our horses and sending many a redskin to his long home , our sufferings were soon forgotten . "
carson viewed the blackfoot nation as a hostile tribe .
he hated the blackfeet , and killed them at every opportunity .
historian david roberts has said : " it was taken for granted that the blackfeet were bad indians ; to shoot them whenever he could was a mountain man 's instinct and duty . "
carson had several encounters with the blackfoot .
his last battle with the blackfeet took place in 1838 .
he was traveling with about one hundred mountain men led by jim bridger .
in montana territory , the group found a teepee with three native american corpses inside .
these three had died of smallpox .
bridger wanted to move on , but carson and the other young men wanted to kill the blackfeet .
they found the blackfoot village and killed ten blackfoot warriors .
the blackfoot found some safety in a pile of rocks but were driven away .
it is not known how many blackfeet died in this incident .
historian david roberts writes : " if anything like pity filled carson 's breast as , in his twenty-ninth year , he beheld the ravaged camp of the blackfeet , he did not bother to remember it . "
carson wrote in his " memoirs " that this battle was " the prettiest fight i ever saw . "
carson 's ideas about native americans softened over the years .
he found himself more and more in their company as he grew older and his attitude towards them became more respectful and humane .
carson wanted the government to put aside some of these land far from reservations .
as an indian agent , he saw that those under his watch were treated with honesty , fairness , and clothed and fed properly .
historian david roberts believes his first marriage to an arapaho woman named singing grass " softened the stern and pragmatic mountaineer 's opportunism . "
in april 1842 , carson went back to his childhood home in missouri to put his daughter adaline in the care of relatives .
on the return trip , carson met john c . fremont on a steamboat on the missouri river .
fremont was a united states army officer in the corps of topographical engineers .
he was about to lead an expedition into the west .
fremont hired carson as a guide at $ 100 a month .
it was the best-paying job of carson 's life .
fremont wrote , " i was pleased with him and his manner of address at this first meeting .
he was a man of medium height , broad-shouldered , and deep-chested , with a clear blue eye and frank speech and address .
in 1842 , carson guided fremont across the oregon trail to wyoming .
this was their first expedition into the west .
the purpose of this expedition was to map and describe the oregon trail as far as south pass .
a guidebook , maps , and other paraphernalia would be printed for settlers .
fremont wrote his government reports .
carson 's name was known across the united states .
in 1843 , carson agreed to join fremont 's second expedition .
he guided fremont across part of the oregon trail to the columbia river in oregon .
the trip was to map and describe the oregon trail from wyoming to the columbia river .
they traveled to great salt lake in utah .
they suffered from bad weather in the sierra nevada mountains , but were saved by carson 's good judgement and his skills as a guide .
they found american settlers who fed them .
the expedition then went into california .
california was mexican territory .
the mexican government ordered fremont to leave .
fremont went back to washington , dc .
the government liked his reports , but ignored his illegal trip into mexico .
fremont was made a captain .
the newspapers called him " the pathfinder " .
fremont went into the mojave desert .
they met a mexican man and boy .
the two told carson that native americans had ambushed their party of travelers .
the male travelers were killed ; the women travelers were staked to the ground , sexually mutilated , and killed .
the murderers then stole the mexicans ' thirty horses .
carson and his friend alexis godey went after the murderers .
they took two days to find them .
they rushed into their camp , killing and scalping two of the murderers .
they returned to the mexican man and boy .
this made carson even greater fame .
it confirmed his status as a western hero in the eyes of the american people .
in 1845 , carson guided fremont on their third and last expedition .
they went to california and oregon .
fremont made scientific plans , but the expedition appeared to be political in nature .
fremont may have been working under secret government orders .
president polk wanted alta california for the united states .
once in california , fremont started to rouse the american settlers into a patriotic fever .
the mexican government ordered him to leave .
fremont went north to oregon .
they camped near klamath lake .
washington , dc made it clear that president polk wanted california .
fremont 's party was attacked by native americans on the night of may 9,1846 .
two or three men in camp were killed .
the native americans fled after a brief struggle .
carson was angry that his friends had been killed .
he took an axe and avenged the death of his friends by chopping away at a dead indian 's face .
fremont wrote , " he knocked his head to pieces . "
a few days later fremont 's party massacred a village of klamath people along the williamson river in the klamath lake massacre .
the village was razed and at least 14 men , women and children were killed .
there was no evidence that the village in question had anything to do with the previous attack .
in 1846 fremont and carson both took part in a california uprising against mexico called the bear flag revolt .
mexico ordered all americans to leave california .
american settlers in california wanted to be free of the mexican government .
the american rebels found courage to oppose mexico because they had fremont .
fremont and his men were able to give some protection to the americans .
he ordered carson to execute an old mexican man named berreyesa and his two adult nephews .
fremont worked hard to win california for the united states .
carson took military records to the secretary of war in washington , dc .
fremont wrote , " this was a service of great trust and honor . . and great danger also . "
in 1847 and 1848 , carson traveled to washington , dc with messages and reports .
in 1848 , he took news of the california gold strike to the nation 's capital .
in 1853 , carson was in northern nevada .
they took them to settlers in northern california , and southern oregon .
carson had with him six " spaniards " — basques — to herd the sheep .
carson became famous around the united states .
the dime novels celebrated carson 's adventures , but were usually colored with exaggeration .
a biography was written by dewitt c . peters in 1859 .
carson became the hero of juvenile fiction not just in the united states .
the first story about carson 's adventures was printed in 1847 .
it was called " an adventure of kit carson : a tale of the sacramento " .
it was printed in holden 's dollar magazine .
other stories were also printed , such as " kit carson : the prince of the goldhunters " and " the prairie flower " .
carson was the perfect mountain man and indian fighter .
his exciting adventures were printed in the story " kiowa charley , the white mustanger " .
in this story , an older kit is said to have " ridden into sioux camps unattended and alone , had ridden out again , but with the scalps of their greatest warriors at his belt . "
in 1849 carson guided soldiers on the trail of mrs . ann white , her baby daughter and " negro servant " .
the commanding officer , captain william grier of the 1st cavalry regiment , ignored carson 's advice about an immediate rescue attempt .
carson describes it in his autobiography : " in about about 200 yards , pursuing the indians , the body of mrs . white was found , perfectly warm , had not been shot through the heart by an arrow . . . i am certain that if the indians had been charged immediately on our arrival she would have been saved . "
her child and servant were taken away by the fleeing jicarillas and killed shortly after the attack .
mrs . white was a frail , delicate , and very beautiful woman .
her countenance even after death indicated a hopeless creature .
over her corpse , we swore vengeance upon her death .
carson found a book about himself in the apache camp .
this was the first time he found himself in print .
he was the hero of adventure stories .
he was sorry for the rest of his life that mrs . white had been killed .
he wrote in his " memoirs " : " in camp was found a book , the first of the kind i had ever seen , in which i was made a great hero , slaying indians by the hundreds . . i have often thought that mrs . white read the same . . . . and prayed for my appearance that she might be saved " .
in 1856 , carson told his life story to an american who wrote it down .
this book is called " memoirs " .
the manuscript was lost when taken east to find a professional writer who would work it into a book .
washington irving was asked , but declined .
the manuscript was found in a trunk in paris in 1905 .
it was later printed .
dewitt c . peters , a famous biography of carson , was written by dewitt c . peters in 1859 .
the book was called " kit carson , the nestor of the mountains , from facts narrated by himself " .
when the book was read to carson he said , " peters laid it on a leetle too thick . "
the mexican – american war lasted from 1846 to 1848 .
mexico sold the territories of alta california and new mexico to the united states .
one of carson 's best known adventures took place during this war .
in december 1846 , carson was ordered by general stephen w . kearny to guide him and his troops from socorro , new mexico to san diego , california .
mexican soldiers attacked kearny and his men near the village of san pasqual , california .
he knew he could not win .
san diego was 25 mi away .
carson and the lieutenant removed their shoes because they made too much noise , and walked barefoot through the desert .
carson wrote in his " memoirs " : " finally got through , but had the misfortune to lose our shoes .
had to travel over a country covered with prickly pear and rocks , barefoot . "
by december 10 , kearny believed new troops would not arrive .
he planned to break through the mexican lines the next morning , but 200 mounted american soldiers arrived in san pasqual late that night .
they swept the area , driving the mexicans away .
he lived in san diego , california .
in 1861 , the american civil war broke out .
carson left his job as an indian agent .
he led the 1st new mexico volunteer infantry .
in october 1861 , he became a colonel .
the volunteers fought the confederate forces in the battle of valverde in new mexico , in february 1862 .
the confederates won this battle but were later defeated .
once the confederates were driven from new mexico , carson 's commander major james henry carleton made his attention to the native americans .
author and historian edwin sabin writes that this officer had a " psychopathic hatred of the apaches " .
carleton led his forces into the mescalero apache territory .
the mescaleros were tired of fighting and put themselves under carson 's protection .
carleton put these apaches on a remote and lonely reservation on the pecos river .
carson disliked the apaches .
he wrote in a report that the jicarilla apaches " were truly the most degraded and troublesome indians we have in our department . . we daily witness them in a state of intoxication in our plaza . "
carson supported carleton 's plans .
he suffered an injury two years before that gave him great trouble .
he resigned from the army in february 1863 .
carleton refused to accept the resignation because he wanted carson to lead a campaign against the navajo .
carleton had chosen a bleak site on the pecos river for his reservation .
he chose this site for the apaches and navajos because it was far from white settlements .
he also wanted these apaches and navajo to act as a buffer for any aggressive acts committed upon the white settlements from kiowas and comanches to the east of bosque redondo .
carson thought that the remoteness and desolation of the reservation would discourage native americans from white settlers .
the mescalero apaches walked 130 miles to the reservation .
by march 1863 , four hundred apaches had settled around fort sumner .
others had fled west to join fugitive bands of apaches .
by summer , many of these people were planting crops and doing other farm work .
on july 7 , carson , with little heart for the navajo roundup , started the campaign against the tribe .
his orders were almost the same as those for the apache roundup : he was to shoot all males on sight and take the women and children captives .
no peace treaties were to be made until all the navajo were on the reservation .
carson searched far and wide for the navajo .
he found their homes , fields , animals , and orchards .
the roundup was a great frustration for carson .
he was in his 50s , tired , and ill .
by 1863 , carson burned the navajo homes and fields and animals from the area .
the navajo would starve if this destruction continued .
one hundred eighty-eight navajo surrendered .
life at the bosque had turned grim .
the apaches and navajos fought .
the water in the pecos contained minerals that gave people cramps and stomach aches .
residents had to walk about 12 mi to find firewood .
carson wanted to take a winter break from the campaign .
kit was ordered to invade the canyon de chelly .
historian david roberts writes , " carson 's sweep through the canyon de chelly in the winter of 1863 – 1864 would prove to be the decisive action in the campaign . "
the canyon de chelly was a sacred place for the navajo people .
they believed that it would now be their strongest sanctuary .
three hundred navajo lived on the canyon rim at a place called fortress rock .
they resisted carson 's invasion by building rope ladders and bridges , lowering water pots into a stream , and keeping out of sight .
these three hundred navajo survived the invasion .
in january 1864 , carson swept through the 35-mile canyon with his forces .
the thousands of peach trees in the canyon were cut down .
few navajo were killed or captured .
carson 's invasion proved to the navajo that the united states could invade their territory at any time .
many navajo surrendered at fort canby .
by march 1864 , there were 3,000 refugees at fort canby .
more than 5,000 more arrived in the camp .
they were suffering from hunger .
carson asked for supplies to feed and clothe them .
the thousands of navajo were made to walk to bosque redondo .
many died along the way .
stragglers in the rear were shot and killed .
in navajo history , this horrific trek is known as the " long walk " of the navajo .
by 1866 , reports indicated that bosque redondo was a complete failure , and major carleton was fired .
in 1868 , a treaty was signed , and the navajo were allowed to return to their homeland .
bosque redondo was closed in 2007 .
carson led his forces against the southwestern tribes at the first battle of adobe walls in the texas panhandle .
adobe walls was an abandoned trading post blown up by its inhabitants to prevent a take-over by hostile native americans .
combatants at the first battle were the united states army and indian scouts against kiowas , comanches , and plains apaches .
it was one of the largest engagements fought on the great plains .
the battle was the result of general carleton 's belief that native americans were responsible for the continuing attacks on settlers along the santa fe trail .
carson wanted to punish them .
with most of the army used during the american civil war , the protection the settlers were not there .
carson led 260 cavalry , 75 infantry , and 72 ute and jicarilla apache army scouts .
he also had two mountain howitzer cannons .
carson discovered a kiowa village on the morning of november 25 .
after destroying this village , he moved forward to adobe walls .
carson found other comanche villages in the area , and realized he would face a very large force of native americans .
a captain pettis estimated that 1,200 to 1,400 comanche and kiowa began to assemble .
that number would swell to 3,000 .
four to five hours of battle , the battle was between the two sides .
carson ran low on ammunition and howitzer shells .
there they burned the village and many fine buffalo robes .
his indian scouts killed and mutilated four elderly and weak kiowas .
first adobe walls , northeast of stinnett in hutchinson county , texas , was carson 's last military engagement .
it ended in victory for the comanche-kiowa alliance that then dominated the llano estacado for another eight years .
it could have resulted in a massacre worse than custer 's last stand in montana territory twelve years after .
three of carson 's men died ; twenty-one were wounded .
more than one hundred warriors lost their lives , and two hundred were wounded .
the retreat to new mexico was then begun .
general carleton gave a brilliant affair that adds another green leaf to the laurel wreath which you have so nobly won in the service of your country .
in 1847 , the future general william tecumseh sherman met kit carson in monterey , california .
he said : " his fame was then at its height , . . and i was very anxious to see a man who had achieved such feats of daring among the wild animals of the rocky mountains , and still wilder indians of the plains . . . i shall express my surprise at beholding such a small , stoop-soft , stoop-shaped face , with extraordinary courage , and boldness , to show that , with extraordinary courage or boldness , and / or colour .
he spoke but not only the questions in monosyllables . "
colonel edward wynkoop said : " kit carson was five feet five and one half-inch -lrb- 1,200 pounds -rrb- tall , weighed about 140 pounds , of nervy , iron temperament , squarely built , slightly bow-legged , and those members apparently too short for his body .
but his head and face made up for all the imperfections of the rest of his person .
his head was large and well-shaped with yellow straight hair , worn long , falling on his shoulders .
his face was fair and smooth as a woman 's with high cheekbones , straight nose , a mouth with a firm , but somewhat sad expression , a keen , deep-set but beautiful , mild blue eye , which could become terrible under some circumstances , and like the warning of the rattlesnake , gave notice of attack .
though quick-sighted , he was slow and soft of speech , and posed great modesty . "
george douglas brewerton made one trip to washington , dc with carson .
brewerton said : " the kit carson of my imagination " was over six feet high — a sort of modern hercules in his build — with an enormous beard , and a voice like a lion . . . the real kit carson i found to be a plain , simple . . man ; rather , with no hair , as a little , soft voice , and as a little soft voice .
the hero of a hundred desperate encounters was a gentleman who was killed .
carson joined freemasonry in the santa fe territory of new mexico , petitioning in montezuma lodge no . 101 .
he was started an apprentice on april 22,1854 .
kit , together with several other freemasons in taos , petitioned to charter bent lodge no . 204 [mask] now bent lodge no . 42 paces from the grand lodge of missouri af & am , a request which was granted on june 1,1860 , with kit elected junior warden of the lodge .
the masonic fraternity continued to serve him and his family , well after his death .
in 1908 , the grand lodge of new mexico built a wrought iron fence around his family burial plot .
the next year , the grand lodge challenged bent lodge to purchase kit 's home .
the kit carson home & museum is now managed by the kit carson museum .
carson was married three times .
his first two wives were native americans .
his third wife was mexican .
carson was the father of ten children .
he never wrote about his first two marriages .
he may have thought he would be a " squaw man " .
such men were not welcomed by polite society .
in 1836 , carson met an arapaho woman who was singing grass at a mountain man in wyoming .
many mountain men were in love with her .
carson was forced to fight a duel with a french trapper named chouinard for his hand in marriage .
carson won , but he had a very narrow escape .
the french trapper 's bullet beat his hair .
the duel was one of the most famous stories about carson in the 1800s .
carson married singing grass .
she went with him on his trapping trips .
they had a daughter .
grass died after giving birth to carson 's second daughter , in about 1841 .
this child did not live long .
carson 's life as a mountain man was too hard for a little girl .
adaline was taught in a school for girls called seminary .
carson brought her west when she was a teenager .
she was married to george stilts from 1931 until they divorced .
in 1858 , she went to california goldfields .
adaline died in 1860 .
in 1841 , carson married a cheyenne woman named making-out-road .
they were only a short time .
making-out-road divorced him in the way of her people by putting adaline and all carson 's property outside their tent .
making-out-road left carson to travel with her people through the west .
in 1842 , carson met josefa jaramillo .
she was the daughter of a wealthy mexican couple living in taos .
carson left the presbyterian church for the catholic church .
he married 14-year-old josefa on february 6,1843 .
they had eight children .
he was embarrassed by this , and tried to hide it .
in 1856 , he said his " memoirs " to another boy and said : " i was a young boy in the school when the cry came , injuns !
i jumped to my rifle and threw down my spelling book , and thar it lies . "
carson liked having other people read to him .
sir walter scott 's long poem , " the lady of the lake " was " the finest expression of outdoor life . "
carson learned to write " c . carson " , but it was very difficult for him .
he made his mark on official papers , and this mark was then witnessed by a clerk .
carson was appointed brevet brigadier general dq dated march 13,1865 1865 1865 1865 1865 1865 .
carson had many friends in the area and helped in government relations .
carson worked at boggsville in bentgsville .
in 1868 , carson traveled to washington , dc to meet with the president of the united states .
soon after his return , his wife died from problems after giving birth to their eighth child .
her death was a crushing blow to carson .
he died a month later on may 23,1868 .
his last words were : " goodbye , friends .
he died from an aortic aneurysm in his home in new york city .
his resting place is taos , new mexico .
carson 's home in taos , new mexico is today a museum called the kit carson home and museum .
a monument was raised in the plaza at santa fe by the new mexico grand army .
in denver , a statue of a mounted kit carson can be found at the top of the mac monnies pioneer monument .
another equestrian statue can be seen in trindad .
carson national forest in new mexico was named after him .
a river in nevada is named for carson , the state 's capital , carson city .
fort carson , an army post near colorado springs , was named after him during world war ii by popular vote of the men training there .
carson park in escondido , california is named after him .
carson has been widely seen in movies and television series .
in 1966 , the actor phillip pine played carson , with michael pate as fellow fremont scout frenchy godey in the episode " samaritans , mountain style " of the syndicated series , " death valley days " , hosted by robert taylor .
carson and godey stop to help a settler in dire straits .
in the 1960s and 1970s carson came under the scrutiny of contemporary historians .
in scholarship of this period he became an arch-villain in the military campaigns against the native americans .
in 1992 , a young professor at colorado college was successful in demanding that a period photograph of carson be removed from the rotc office .
in 1992 , a tourist told a journalist at the carson home in taos , " i will not go into the home of that racist , genocidal killer . "
in the 1970s , a navajo at a trading post said , " no one here will talk about kit carson .
he was a butcher .
in 1993 , a symposium was organized to air various views on carson , but the navajo spokespeople refused to attend .
over time , historical analysis of carson shifted again .
the movie is considered one of the few frontiersmen whose change of heart toward the indians .
he was known for his role as carson in the 1936 movie " sutter 's gold " .
he played carson in the 1940 western movie " kit carson " .
he played kit carson in the television mini-series " kit carson " .
he is best known for his role as carson in the 1986 miniseries " dream west " .
carson was the inspiration for a character in the popular italian comic book series " tex willer " .
carson is a supporting character in willa cather 's novel , " death comes for the archbishop " .
carson 's contributions to western history have been reexamined by historians , journalists and indian activists since the 1960s .
historian hampton sides said that carson believed the native americans needed reservations as a way of separating and shielding them from white hostility and white culture .
he is said to have viewed the raids on white settlements as driven by desperation , “ committed from absolute necessity when in a starving condition . ”
indian hunting grounds were disappearing as waves of white settlers filled the region .
in 2014 there was a petition to rename kit carson park in taos , nm red willow park .
despite the support of the taos pueblo and the residents of taos valley the park was not renamed .
