the book of zechariah and the book of psalms also refer to trees and water without explicitly mentioning eden .
another version of the name is the hebrew word for " pleasure " .
the hebrew term is translated as " pleasure " in sarah 's secret saying in .
like the genesis flood narrative , the story of eden is like a king , as a man placed in a divine garden to guard the tree of life .
adam and eve are walking around the garden of eden .
the garden of eden is considered to be a mythological .
there have been various suggestions for its location : at the head of the persian gulf , in southern mesopotamia paces now iraq iraq <unk> where the tigris and euphrates rivers run into the sea ; and in armenia .
the second part of the genesis creation narrative , opens with yhwh-elohim translate here " the lord god " , see names of god in judaism .
the tree of life also comes in the midst of the garden , and the tree of knowledge of good and evil .
the man was free to eat from any tree in the garden except the tree of knowledge .
in chapter three , the man and the woman were seduced by the serpent into eating the forbidden fruit .
cherubim were placed east of the garden , and a flaming sword which turned every way , to guard the way of the tree of life .
ezekiel , the son of man , is a god 's name .
but the king sinned through wickedness and violence , and so he was driven out of the garden and thrown to the earth , where now he is consumed by god 's fire : " all those who knew you in the nations are appalled at you , you have come to a horrible end and will be no more . "
" it appears that the lebanon is an alternative placement in phoenician mythologies as in ez 28,13 , iii . 48zong of the garden of eden " .
edward lipinski and peter kyle mccarter suggested that the garden of the godstify sumerian paradise amounted to a mountain sanctuary in the lebanon and anti-lebanon ranges .
at its source of the rivers , while others have looked at the head of the persian gulf , in southern mesopotamiacek now iraqcek where the tigris and euphrates rivers run into the sea .
in the talmud and the jewish kabbalah , the scholars agree that there are two types of spiritual places called " garden in eden " .
it has been created since the beginning of the world , and will appear gloriously at the end of time .
the jewish people are " clothed with garments of light and eternal life , and eat of the tree of life " enoch enoch 58,3cifully near to god and his anointed ones .
this is opposed by the hebrew terms " gehinnom " and " sheol " .
in modern judaism , it is believed that history will complete itself and the ultimate destination will be when all mankind returns to the garden of eden .
in the 19th century book " legends of the jews " , louis ginzberg wrote about jewish legends of the jews .
the compartments are not described .
in chapter two , the jewish people say that the lower gan eden was the same as the god .
the tree of knowledge is a hedge around the tree of life .
while in the garden , adam and eve were served meat dishes by angels and the animals of the world understood human language , respected mankind as god 's image , and feared adam and eve .
when one dies , one 's soul must pass through the lower gan eden in order to reach the higher gan eden .
in the garden is a pillar of fire and smoke that goes to the higher gan eden .
there are several mentions of " the garden " in the qur ' an aarhus 2 : 35,7 : 19,20 : 117bornen , while the garden of eden , without the word " ʿadn " , is commonly the fourth layer of the islamic heaven .
the story mainly shows the expulsion of hawwa and adam after they were tempted by shaitan .
despite the bible , the quran mentions only one tree in eden , the tree of immortality .
adam and eve were told to eat from the tree .
followers of the latter day saints movement believe that after adam and eve were expelled from the garden of eden they resided in a place known as adam-ondi-ahman , located in present-day daviess county , missouri .
it is recorded in the doctrine and covenants that adam blessed his posterity there and that he will return to that place at the time of the final judgment in fulfillment of a prophecy set forth in the book of mormon .
the garden of eden motifs often appears in illuminated manuscripts and paintings are the " sleep of adam " lilith " creation of eve "lity , the temptation of eve by the serpent , the " fall of man " where adam takes the fruit , and the " expulsion " .
for many medieval writers , the image of the garden of eden creates a place for human love and sexuality , often associated with the classic and medieval trope of the locus amoenus .
