the melbourne grand prix circuit is a street circuit around albert park lake , only a few kilometres south of central melbourne .
although the entire track consists of normally public roads , each sector includes medium to high speed characteristics .
the circuit also has characteristics of a street circuit 's enclosed nature due to concrete barriers annually built along the lakeside drive curve , in particular , where run-off is not available due to the proximity of the lake shore .
the circuit uses everyday sections of road that circle albert park lake .
the roads that are used were rebuilt prior to the first race in 1996 to ensure consistency and smoothness .
before 2007 there was only a few other places on the formula 1 calendar with a body of water close to the track .
many of the new tracks , such as valencia , singapore and abu dhabi are close to a body of water .
the course is considered to be quite fast and relatively easy to drive .
the flat terrain around the lake , coupled with a track design that features few true straights , means that the track is not easy to pass .
land around the circuit included a large aquatic centre , a golf course , a lakeside stadium , some restaurants and rowing boathouses .
middle park , the home of south melbourne fc was demolished in 1994 .
the grand prix will continue until at least 2020 .
during the nine months of the year , most of the track can be driven by ordinary street-registered vehicles either clockwise or anti-clockwise .
the only set of lights on the track is halfway between turns 12 and 13 .
the chicanes at turns 11 and 12 are much more open than that used in the grand prix .
the speed limit is generally 40 km / h , while some short sections have a speed limit of 50 km / h , which is still slower than an f1 car under pit lane speed restrictions .
black swans live and breed in albert park .
about 80 % of the track edge is lined with short parkland-style chain-linked fencing leaving normal drivers less room for error than f1 drivers have during race weekend .
there is a large shoulder room between the outside of each lane and the fencing .
albert park has the distinction of being the only venue to host the australian grand prix in both world championship and non-world championship formats with an earlier configuration of the current circuit used for the race on two occasions during the 1950s .
