In number theory, the fundamental theorem of arithmetic, also called the unique factorization theorem or the unique-prime-factorization theorem, states that every integer greater than 1 either is a prime number itself or can be represented as the product of prime numbers and that, moreover, this representation is unique, up to (except for) the order of the factors.
The theorem says two things for this example: first, that 1200 can be represented as a product of primes, and second, that no matter how this is done, there will always be exactly four 2s, one 3, two 5s, and no other primes in the product.
The requirement that the factors be prime is necessary: factorizations containing composite numbers may not be unique (e.g., 12 = 2 × 6 = 3 × 4).
This theorem is one of the main reasons why 1 is not considered a prime number: if 1 were prime, then factorization into primes would not be unique; for example, 2 = 2 × 1 = 2 × 1 × 1 = ...
Book VII, propositions 30, 31 and 32, and Book IX, proposition 14 of Euclid's "Elements" are essentially the statement and proof of the fundamental theorem.
(In modern terminology: if a prime "p" divides the product "ab", then "p" divides either "a" or "b" or both.)
Proposition 30 is referred to as Euclid's lemma, and it is the key in the proof of the fundamental theorem of arithmetic.
(In modern terminology: a least common multiple of several prime numbers is not a multiple of any other prime number.)
Book IX, proposition 14 is derived from Book VII, proposition 30, and proves partially that the decomposition is unique – a point critically noted by André Weil.
Indeed, in this proposition the exponents are all equal to one, so nothing is said for the general case.
Article 16 of Gauss' "Disquisitiones Arithmeticae" is an early modern statement and proof employing modular arithmetic.
Every positive integer "n" > 1 can be represented in exactly one way as a product of prime powers: where "p" < "p" < ... < "p" are primes and the "n" are positive integers.
This representation is commonly extended to all positive integers, including 1, by the convention that the empty product is equal to 1 (the empty product corresponds to "k" = 0).
This representation is called the canonical representation of "n", or the standard form of "n".
Note that factors "p" = 1 may be inserted without changing the value of "n" (e.g., 1000 = 2×3×5).
In fact, any positive integer can be uniquely represented as an infinite product taken over all the positive prime numbers: where a finite number of the "n" are positive integers, and the rest are zero.
In particular, the values of additive and multiplicative functions are determined by their values on the powers of prime numbers.
It must be shown that every integer greater than 1 is either prime or a product of primes.
Then, by strong induction, assume this is true for all numbers greater than 1 and less than "n".
If "n" is prime, there is nothing more to prove.
Suppose, to the contrary, there is an integer that has two distinct prime factorizations.
We now have two distinct prime factorizations of some integer strictly smaller than "n", which contradicts the minimality of "n".
Assume that "s" > 1 is the smallest positive integer which is the product of prime numbers in two different ways.
If any "p" = "q" then, by cancellation, "s"/"p" = "s"/"q" would be another positive integer, different from s, which is greater than 1 and also has two distinct factorizations.
Without loss of generality, take "p" < "q" (if this is not already the case, switch the "p" and "q" designations.)
By rearrangement we see,
Here "u" = (("p" ... "p") - ("q" ... "q")) is positive, for if it were negative or zero then so would be its product with "p", but that product equals "t" which is positive.
So "u" is either 1 or factors into primes.
In either case, "t" = "p""u" yields a prime factorization of "t", which we know to be unique, so "p" appears in the prime factorization of "t".
Now, "p" appears in the prime factorization of "t", and it is not equal to any "q", so it must be one of the "r"'s.
This contradiction shows that "s" does not actually have two different prime factorizations.
As a result, there is no smallest positive integer with multiple prime factorizations, hence all positive integers greater than 1 factor uniquely into primes.
The first generalization of the theorem is found in Gauss's second monograph (1832) on biquadratic reciprocity.
This paper introduced what is now called the ring of Gaussian integers, the set of all complex numbers "a" + "bi" where "a" and "b" are integers.
It is now denoted by formula_9 He showed that this ring has the four units ±1 and ±"i", that the non-zero, non-unit numbers fall into two classes, primes and composites, and that (except for order), the composites have unique factorization as a product of primes.
This is the ring of Eisenstein integers, and he proved it has the six units formula_13 and that it has unique factorization.
In this ring one has
Examples like this caused the notion of "prime" to be modified.
In formula_14 it can be proven that if any of the factors above can be represented as a product, e.g., 2 = "ab", then one of "a" or "b" must be a unit.
This is the traditional definition of "prime".
It can also be proven that none of these factors obeys Euclid's lemma; e.g., 2 divides neither (1 + ) nor (1 − ) even though it divides their product 6.
The mention of formula_14 is required because 2 is prime and irreducible in formula_20 Using these definitions it can be proven that in any integral domain a prime must be irreducible.
In 1843 Kummer introduced the concept of ideal number, which was developed further by Dedekind (1876) into the modern theory of ideals, special subsets of rings.
Multiplication is defined for ideals, and the rings in which they have unique factorization are called Dedekind domains.
The German edition includes all of his papers on number theory: all the proofs of quadratic reciprocity, the determination of the sign of the Gauss sum, the investigations into biquadratic reciprocity, and unpublished notes.