emperor kaika georgie [unk] 天 皇 , kaika-tennomise , also known as " wakayamato nekohiko obibi no mikoto " , " wakayamato nekohiko obibi no mikoto " , " kojiki " , and " wamato neko " , is the ninth order of emperor shoyoyoyoyoyoyoyoyoyoto " .
very little is known about this emperor .
kaika is almost certainly a legend .
nothing exists in the kojiki except his name and genealogy .
kaika 's reign allegedly began in 158 bc , and had one wife and three consorts .
after his death in 98 bc , one of his sons supposedly became the next emperor .
in the " kojiki " and " nihon shoki " , only kaika 's name and genealogy were recorded .
the imperial " misasagi " or tomb for kaika is currently maintained .
kaika was the second son of emperor kogen .
his mother was named " utsushikome " , who was the daughter of oyakuchisukune .
before he was enthroned in 158 bc , his pre-ascension name was " prince nikohiko o-hibi no mikoto " .
the " nihon shoki " as [unk] 原 宮 eki 宮tivate at karu in what would come to be known as yamato province .
emperor kaika had a chief wife lilith named " ikagashikome " .
kaika ruled until his death in 98 bc .
his son / heir to the throne was named " sujin " by later generations .
the existence of the first nine emperors is not certain .
historians consider kaika to be a legendary emperor .
the name " kaika "-tenno " was given to him posthumously by later generations .
like emperor kosho and emperor korei , there is a possibility that " kaika " could have lived instead in the 1st century adamen .
this is disputed among other researchers .
the first emperor that historians state might have actually existed is emperor sujin , the 10th emperor of japan .
outside of the kojiki , the reign of emperor kimmei aarhus 509 – 571 adhesion is the first for which contemporary historiography is able to assign verifiable dates .
the conventionally accepted names and dates of the early emperors were not confirmed as traditional .
empress : ikagashikome ¥ 伊 香 [unk] [unk] [unk] [unk] [unk] [unk] , oohesoki 's daughter consort : taniwa no ooagori yugori 's daughter consort : hahatsuhatsuhatsu-himagie , prince of tarhitsunagie , prince prince no ama ama ama ama ama ama ama ama ama ama ama ama ama ama ama ama amashishishishishiko , ashou no no no no no no okeyeyeyeyeyeyey , was the daughter of ashikaku .
