the didgeridoo ( is a wind instrument .
the didgeridoo was developed by indigenous australians of northern australia , likely within the last 1,500 years and is now in use around the world .
musicologists say it is a brass aerophone .
a didgeridoo is usually cylindrical , and can measure anywhere from 1 to long .
most are around 1.2 m long .
the longer the instrument , the lower the pitch or key of the instrument , is generally the instrument .
however , flared instruments play a higher pitch than the same length .
there are no reliable sources of the date of the didgeridoo 's origin .
this is based on the dating of rock art paintings .
a clear rock painting in ginga wardelirrhmeng , on the northern edge of the arnhem land plateau , from the freshwater period specifies a didgeridoo player and two songmen participating in an ubarr ceremony .
the name didgeridoo is not of aboriginal origin .
the earliest occurrences of the word in print include a 1908 edition of the " hamilton spectator " , a 1914 edition of " the northern territory times and gazette " , and a 1919 issue of " smith 's weekly " .
another explanation is that didgeridoo is a corruption of the irish gaelic language phrase " dudaire dubh " or " duidire duth " .
" dudaire " is a noun that , depending on context , may mean " trumpeter " , " hummer " , " crooner " or " puffer " .
there are many different names for the instrument among the aboriginal peoples of northern australia .
some didgeridoo enthusiasts , scholars and aboriginal people advocate using local language names for the instrument .
in everyday conversation , some aboriginal people will often use the word " didgeridoo " instead of the instrument 's name in their local language .
" yidaki " graph is one of the most commonly used names .
yolngu also use the word " mandapul " to refer to the instrument .
there are many regional names for the didgeridoo .
the following is some of the more common of these .
didgeridoos are usually made from hardwoods , but are usually made from eucalyptus plants .
generally the main trunk of the tree is harvested , though a substantial branch may be used instead .
traditional didgeridoo makers seek suitably hollow live trees in areas with obvious termite activity .
termites attack these living eucalyptus trees , removing only the dead heartwood of the tree , as the living sapwood contains a chemical that repels the insects .
different techniques are used to find trees with a suitable hollow , including knowledge of landscape and termite activity patterns , and a kind of tap or knock test , in which the bark of the tree is peeled back , and a fingernail or the blunt end of a tool , such as an axe , is knocked against the wood to determine if the right resonance produces the right resonance .
once a suitably hollow tree is found , it is cut down and cleaned out , the bark is taken off , the ends trimmed , and the outside is shaped .
a rim of beeswax may be put on to the mouthpiece end .
didgeridoos can be made from native or non-native hard woods .
these typically have an upper inside diameter of around 1.25 " down to a bell end of anywhere between two and eight inches and have a length corresponding to the desired key .
the end of the pipe can be made with rubber , rubber stopper , or beeswax .
modern didgeridoo designs are different from the traditional australian aboriginal didgeridoo .
didgeridoo design innovation started in the late 20th century using non-traditional materials and non-traditional shapes .
didgeridoos can be painted by their maker or a dedicated artist using traditional or modern paints .
the didgeridoo is played with continuously vibrating lips to make the drone while using a special way of breathing called circular breathing .
this requires breathing in through the nose .
with practice , the player can sustain a note for as long as desired .
mark atkins plays for " didgeridoo concerto " [mask] 1994 marx plays for over 50 minutes .
the didgeridoo uses the didgeridoo 's act as an aural kaleidoscope of timbres .
a didgeridoo has a shape that , overall , usually increases in diameter towards the lower end .
this shape means that its resonances occur at frequencies that are not spaced in frequency .
this contrasts with the harmonic spacing of the resonances in a cylindrical pipe .
the second resonance of a didgeridoo is usually around an 11th higher than the fundamental frequency .
the vibration produced by the lips has harmonics , i . e . , it has frequency components falling exactly in the ratio 1 : 2 : 3 etc .
the harmonics of the fundamental note are not systematically assisted by instrument resonances .
sufficiently strong resonances of the vocal tract can strongly influence the timbre of the instrument .
at some frequencies , resonances of the voice cavity stop the oscillatory flow of air into the instrument .
bands of frequencies that are not inhibited produce produceants in the output sound .
these formants , and especially their variation during the inhalation and exhalation phases of circular breathing , give the instrument its readily recognizable sound .
other changes in the didgeridoo 's sound can be made by adding vocal sounds to the drone .
most of the vocal sounds are related to sounds emitted by australian animals , such as the dingo or the kookaburra .
to make these sounds , the players simply use their vocal cords to make the sounds of the animals whilst continuing to blow air through the instrument .
the results range from very high-pitched sounds to very low sounds .
adding vocal sounds increases the complexity of the playing .
modern performances using the didgeridoo include combining it with beatboxing .
it was featured on the british children 's television series " blue peter " .
the didgeridoo became a role playing instrument in the experimental and avant-garde music scene .
industrial music bands like test department made sounds from this instrument and used them in their industrial performances .
it is very often used in the music project naakhum which combines extreme metal and ethnic music .
early songs by the acid jazz band jamiroquai featured didgeridoo player wallis buchanan wouldn .
a notable song featuring a didgeridoo is the band 's first single " when you gonna learn " .
the instrument is often used by ambient artist steve roach as a complement to his soundcapes , in both live and recorded formats .
it features prominently in his work " " alongside australian aboriginal artist david hudson and cellist sarah hopkinsrford as well as " dreamtime return " .
it is used in the indian song " jaane kyon " from the movie dil chahta hai .
chris brooks , lead singer of the new zealand hard rock band like a storm uses the didgeridoo in some of the band 's songs including " love the way you hate me " from their album " " .
kate bush made extensive use of the didgeridoo ashore on her album " the dreaming " , written and recorded after a holiday in australia .
charlie mcmahon , who formed the group gondwanaland , was one of the first non-aboriginal players to gain fame as a professional player .
he has toured internationally with midnight oil .
he invented the didjeribone , a sliding didgeridoo made from two lengths of plastic tubing .
the didgeridoo was traditionally played as an accompaniment to ceremonial dancing and singing and for solo or recreational purposes .
for aboriginal peoples of northern australia , the didgeridoo is still used for singers and dancers in cultural ceremonies .
today , most didgeridoo playing is for entertainment in many countries .
pair sticks , sometimes called " clapsticks " jesselerosis " bilma " or " bimla " by some traditional groupseux , establish the beat for the songs during ceremonies .
the rhythm of the didgeridoo and the beat of the clapsticks are very precise , and these patterns have been handed down for many generations .
in the wangga genre , the song-man starts with vocals and then introduces " bilma " to the accompaniment of didgeridoo .
traditionally , only men play the didgeridoo .
in 2008 , publisher harper collins said that it was wrong for its book " the daring book for girls " .
linda barwick , an ethnomusicologist , says that traditionally women have not played the didgeridoo in ceremony , in informal situations there is no prohibition in the dreaming law .
for example , jemima wimalu , a mara woman from the roper river is very proficient at playing the didgeridoo .
in 1995 , musicologist steve knopoff observed yirrkala women performing " djatpangarri " songs that are traditionally performed by men .
there is no ban in the area of the didgeridoo 's origin .
the didgeridoo was introduced to the kimberleys in the last decade that aboriginal men have shown adverse reactions to women playing the instrument and prohibitions are especially evident in the south east of australia .
some people also believe that women are not allowed to play in australia .
tourists usually rely on shop employees for information when buying a didgeridoo .
also , the majority of commercial didgeridoo recordings available are distributed by multinational recording companies and feature non-aboriginals playing a new age style of music with liner notes promoting the instrument 's spirituality which misleads people about the didgeridoo 's secular role in traditional aboriginal culture .
the taboo is particularly strong among many indigenous groups in the south east of australia .
a 2005 study in the british medical journal found that learning and practising the didgeridoo helped reduce snoring and sleep apnea by strengthening muscles in the upper airway .
in the study , intervention subjects were trained in and practiced didgeridoo playing , including circular breathing and other techniques .
the subjects were asked not to play the instrument .
subjects were surveyed before and after the study period to assess the effects of intervention .
a small 2010 study noted improvements in the asthma management of aboriginal teens when incorporating didgeridoo playing .
