the term is often used by christians to refer to the physical buildings where they worship .
when viewed from plan view the vertical beam of the cross is represented by the center aisle and seating while the horizontal beam and junction of the cross is formed by the bema and altar .
many buildings that were designed for other purposes have now been converted for church use .
from the 11th to the 14th centuries , a wave of building of cathedrals and smaller parish churches were built across western europe .
a cathedral is a building in the eastern orthodox , or oriental orthodox churches .
in the greek language , the older word " ecclesia " , " ekklesia " , literally " assembly " , " congregation " , or the place where such a gathering occurs occurs occurs occurs .
the earliest christians did not build church buildings .
in the second half of the 3rd century ad , the first purpose-built halls for christian worship underwent construction began to be constructed .
many of these were destroyed early in the next century .
from the 11th to the 14th centuries , a wave of cathedral-building and building of smaller parish churches happened across western europe .
besides serving as a place of worship , the cathedral or parish church was frequently used as a general gathering-place by the communities in which they were located .
the term " romanesque " refers to the tradition of roman architecture .
later in the same era , groined vault became popular .
the interiors of the museum and the inside of the building were widened and the motifs of sculptures took on more epic traits and themes .
gothic churches lost the compact qualities of the romanesque era .
all had geometric properties that reduced the need for large , rigid walls to ensure structural stability .
this also allowed the size of windows to increase , producing brighter and lighter interiors .
many architects used these developments to push the limits of structural possibility .
in germany , the netherlands and spain , it became popular to build hall churches .
gothic cathedrals were lavishly designed , as in the romanesque era , and many share romanesque traits .
the notre-dame de paris and notre-dame de reims in france , as well as the san francesco d ’ assisi in palermo , and the salisbury cathedral and wool church in england show the details of gothic cathedrals .
some of the most well-known gothic churches remained unfinished for centuries , after the gothic style fell out of popularity .
in the 15th and 16th century , the change in ethics and society due to the renaissance and the reformation also influenced the building of churches .
in protestant churches , the proclamation of god 's word is of special importance , the visitor 's line of view is directed towards the pulpit .
buildings , even churches , were used as indicators for wealth , authority and influence .
domes and capitals were decorated with moulding .
the sprawling decoration with floral ornamentation and mythological motives raised until about 1720 to the rococo era .
the protestant churches preferred lateral churches .
a common architecture for churches is the shape of a cross .
these churches also often have a dome or other large vaulted space in the interior .
other common shapes for churches include a circle , to represent eternity , or an octagon or similar star shape , to represent the church 's bringing light to the world .
another common feature is the spire , a tall tower on the " west " end of the church or over the crossing .
often , the altar will not be oriented due east , but in the direction of sunrise .
the old roman custom of having the altar at the west end and the entrance at the east was sometimes followed as late as the 11th century .
after the roman empire became officially christian , the term came by extension to refer to a large and important church that has been given special ceremonial rights by the pope .
thus the word retains two senses today , one architectural and the other ecclesiastical .
it might be as small as christ church cathedral in oxford , england , sacred heart cathedral in raleigh , united states , or chur cathedral in switzerland .
the cathedral was the largest building in any region .
a pilgrimage church is a church where people go to the tomb of a saints .
a collegiate church is a church where the daily office of worship is maintained by a college of canons .
the church often had many lands that were held by the church .
old and disused church buildings can be seen as an interesting proposition for developers .
there is another trend to convert old buildings for worship .
a windmill has also been turned into a church at reigate heath .
