a valley is a low area between two or more mountains .
a valley is a large area of rock that is longer than it is wide .
most valleys belong to one of these two main types or a mix of them , at least with respect to the cross section of the slopes or hillsides .
however , in the lowest stretch of a river , where it approaches its base level , it begins to deposit sediment and the valley bottom becomes a floodplain .
some of the first human complex societies originated in river valleys .
in prehistory , the rivers were used as a source of fresh water and food tossing fish and gamemite , as well as a place to wash and a sewer .
in southern england vales occur between the escarpment slopes of pairs of chalk formations , where the chalk dome has been eroded , exposing less resistant underlying rock , usually claystone .
rift valleys , such as the albertine rift and gregory rift are formed by the expansion of the earth 's crust .
there are many forms of valley associated with glaciation that may be referred to as glacial valleys .
a valley carved by glaciers is usually u-shaped and resembles a trough .
this trough valley becomes visible upon the recession of the glacier that forms it .
when the ice recedes or thaws , the valley remains , often littered with small boulders that were transported within the ice .
floor gradient does not affect the valley 's shape , it is the glacier 's size that does .
continuously flowing glaciers , especially in the ice age , and large-sized glaciers carve wide , deep valleys , sometimes with valley steps that reflect different erosion rates .
the glaciers carved it out wider and deeper , and changing the shape .
this proceeds through the glacial erosion processes of glaciation and abrasion .
as the ice melts and retreats , the valley is left with very steep sides and a flat floor .
this replaces the original stream or river and is known as a misfit stream because it is smaller than one would expect given the size of its valley .
they carry large volumes of melt water .
their flat bottoms are typical of subglacial glacial erosion .
in northern europe , the scandinavian ice sheet during the various ice ages advanced slightly uphill against the lie of the land .
as a result , its meltwaters flowed parallel to the ice margin to reach the north sea basin , forming huge , flat valleys known as " urstromtaler " .
depending on the topography , the rock types and the climate , a lot of transitional forms between v-, u-and plain valleys exist .
the broader a mountain valley , the lower its shoulders are in most cases .
an exception are canyons where the shoulder almost is near the top of the valley 's slope .
even in winter when the valley 's floor is completely filled with fog , these villages are in sunshine .
salzburg gives the side valleys parallel to each other , and also they are hanging .
usually this is the result of a violent erosion of the former valley shoulders , a special genesis found also at aretes and glacial cirques , at every scottish glen , or in a northern fjord .
they are most commonly associated with u-shaped valleys when a glacier flows into a glacier of larger volume .
the main glacier erodes a deep u-shaped valley with nearly vertical sides .
the shallower valley is now hanging above the main valley .
waterfalls are usually at the water at the waterfalls .
hanging valleys are also the result of varying rates of erosion of the main valley and the tributary valleys .
the different rates of erosion are associated with the composition of the adjacent rocks in the different valley locations .
the valleys are eroded and deepened by glaciers or erosion at a slower rate than that of the main valley floor .
the tributary valley of more resistant rock then hangs over the main valley .
by contrast , with glacial u-shaped valleys , there is less downward and sideways erosion .
the severe slope denudation results in gently sloping valley sides and their transition to the actual valley bottom is unclear .
side valleys are rather v than u-shaped .
the location of the villages depends on the across-valley profile , on climate and local traditions , and on the danger of avalanches or landslides .
most are places on terraces or alluvial fans if they live .
this term is often used in new england , appalachia , and the ozarks of arkansas and missouri to describe such geographic features .
appalacian story tellers say that a holler is an area where a person has to hollerfully yellizes to communicate with their nearest neighbor .
