his grandson , john f . kennedy , became a member of the united states house of representatives in 2011 .
his son , joseph p . kennedy sr . , and rose fitzgerald kennedy include a president of the united statesnesia .
joseph sr . and rose 's daughter , eunice , founded the national institute of child health and human development workshop .
other descendants of joseph and rose kennedy have been active as lawyers , authors , and activists on behalf of those with physical and intellectual challenges .
their father , diarmaid o cinneide fionn , held knight castle close to what is today puckane , county tipperary in 1546 .
from there , they lost out to the new english order in the kingdom of ireland .
their oldest was joseph patrick " joe " kennedy sr . , who made a fortune in banking and securities trading .
he was the first chairman of the securities and exchange commission , chairman of the maritime commission , and u . s . president franklin d . roosevelt .
he was appointed by president harry truman to recommend administrative changes in the federal government .
joseph sr . and rose elizabeth fitzgerald , were the parents of nine children : joseph jr . , john , rosemary , kathleen , eunice , patricia , robert , jean , and ted .
john served as the 35th president of the united states .
many have attended harvard university .
joseph sr . expected his eldest son , joseph jr . , to go into politics and to be elected president .
joseph jr . was elected as a delegate to the 1940 democratic national convention .
it then fell upon john , who had considered a career as a journalist — he had authored a book and did some reporting for hearst newspapers — to fulfill his father 's desire to see the family involved in politics and government .
after returning from the navy , john served in the u . s . house of representatives representing the 11th congressional district of massachusetts from 1947 to 1953 , and then as u . s .
during john 's administration , robert served as attorney general .
among the kennedy 's accomplishments : the alliance for progress , peace corps , peaceful resolution to the cuban missile crisis , the nuclear test ban treaty of 1963 , the 24th amendment ending the poll tax , and the civil rights act of 1964 .
the family was the subject of intense media coverage during and after the kennedy presidency .
ted served in the senate with his brother robert .
in november 2012 , joseph p . kennedy iii , son of former rep . joseph p . kennedy ii and grandson of robert f . kennedy , was elected to the u . s . house of representatives from massachusetts ' 4th congressional district .
in 1969 , ted questions in a television talk about the chappaquiddick incident .
in 1941 , rosemary underwent a lobotomy which was to stop behavioral and emotional issues .
ted was seriously injured and spent months in a hospital recovering from a severe back injury , a punctured lung , broken ribs and internal bleeding .
since john f . kennedy 's election to the u . s . house of representatives in 1946 , there have been very few times in which a kennedy was not holding public office — first from december 22,1960 until january 20,1961 .
in 1961 , john f . kennedy was presented with a grant of arms for all the descendants of patrick kennedysitor .
the crest is an armored hand holding four arrows between two olive branches .
