the first ascii emoticons , were written by scott fahlman in 1982 , but emoticons actually originated on the plato iv computer system in 1972 .
in western countries , emoticons are usually written at a right angle to the direction of the text .
the katakana character set is that can be understood without tilting one 's head to the left .
this style started in 1986 .
in the late 1990s , sms and the internet became popular .
in web forums , instant messengers and online games , text emoticons are often automatically replaced with small corresponding images , which came to be called " emoticons " as well .
certain complex character combinations can only be accomplished in non-latin scripts , giving rise to very complex forms , sometimes known by their romanized japanese name of kaomoji .
the use of emoticons can be traced back to the 17th century , drawn by a slovak notary to show his satisfaction with the state of his town 's municipal financial records in 1635 , but they were commonly used in casual and humorous writing .
digital forms of emoticons on the internet were included in a proposal by scott fahlman of carnegie mellon university in pittsburgh , pennsylvania , in a message on september 19,1982 .
the " national telegraphic review and operators guide " in april 1857 documented the use of the number 73 in morse code to express " love and kisses " .
"
dodge 's manual " in 1908 documented the reintroduction of " love and kisses " as the number 88 .
gajadhar and green comment that both morse code abbreviations are more succinct than modern abbreviations such as lol .
in 1912 , ambrose bierce created a paper called " an improvement in punctuation-the snigger point , or note of cachinnation : it is written thus thus thus and presents a smiling mouth . "
it is to be added , with the full stop , to every jocular or ironical sentence .
note that the symbols are correctly oriented and are not sideways .
the september 1962 issue of " mad " magazine included an article titled " typewri-toons " .
the piece , featuring typewriter-generated artwork credited to " royal portable " , was entirely made up of repurposed typography , including a capital letter p having a bigger bust than a capital i , a lowercase b and d discussing their pregnancies , an asterisk on top of a letter to indicate the letter had come from a lowercase of a classroom .
two more " typewri-toons " articles later appeared in " mad " , in 1965 and 1987 .
the " smiley face " was a yellow button with two black dots representing eyes and an upturned thick curve representing a mouth was created by harvey ball in 1963 .
it was realized on order of a large insurance company as part of a campaign to improve the morale of its employees and soon became a big hit .
this smiley presumably inspired many later emoticons ; the most basic graphic emoticon that shows this is , in fact , a small yellow smiley face .
nabokov said : " i often think there should exist a special typographical sign for a smile – some sort of concave mark , a supine round bracket , which i would now like to trace in reply to your question . "
in 1971 , a french journalist , franklin loufrani , created a smiley logo to mark good news in the french newspaper " france soir " .
loufrani was the first person to trademark the symbol , in 1972 .
later in 1996 , loufrani created the smiley company with his son nicolas loufrani .
he published his icons as well as emoticons created by others , along with their ascii versions , in an online smiley dictionary in the early 2000s .
this dictionary included over 3,000 different smileys and was published as a book called dico smileys in 2002 .
smiley was trademarked in over 100 countries .
smiley company filed a trademark application with the united states patent office in 1997 .
walmart opposed the registration in 2001 .
the uspto eventually sided with walmart .
seeking to prevent walmart from using any smiley face design , nicolas loufrani sued walmart in 2009 .
the case was closed in 2011 .
the terms of the settlement were unknown , but walmart continued to use its smiley design intermittently and returned to using it in a major marketing role in 2016 .
starting around 1972 , on the plato system , emoticons and other decorative graphics were produced ascii art .
for example , wobtax and victory both produced convincing smiley faces ashore where the overprinted characters produced the solid background , and pixels untouched by any of the characters produced the actual design .
scott fahlman was the first person to use the emoticons .
the text of his original proposal was posted to the carnegie mellon university computer science general board on september 19,1982 uncovered 11 : 44 paces .
other notable computer scientists who participated in this work include david touretzky , guy steele , and jaime carbonell .
many variations of the theme were suggested by scott and others .
the most basic emoticons are very similar in form , but each of them can be changed by being rotatedicatives making them tiny ambigrams ashore , with or without a hyphengb ipod nose nose nose nose nose nose .
there are also some possible variations to emoticons to get new definitions , like changing a character to express a new feeling , or slightly change the mood of the emoticon .
a broad grin is sometimes shown with crinkled eyes to express further amusement ; -lrb-- -rrb-
there are hundreds of other variations including : " " -lrb- or " -rrb- for anger , or " -lrb----rrb- for an evil grin , which can be , again , used in reverse , for an unhappy angry face , in the shape of codice _ 2 .
for vampire teeth , codice _ 26 for grimace , and codice _ 27 can be used to denote a flirting or joking tone , or may be implying a second meaning in the sentence preceding it .
as computers offer more built-in support for non-western writing systems , it has become possible to use other glyphs to build emoticons .
the ' issn ' emoticon , is a piece of writing system used for writing words .
an equal sign is often used for the eyes in place of the colon , seen as codice _ 29 , without changing the meaning of the emoticon .
in these instances , the hyphen is almost always omitted or , occasionally , replaced with an o as in codice _ 1 .
in most circles it has become acceptable to omit the hyphen , whether a colon or an equal sign is used for the eyes , but in some areas of usage people still prefer the larger , more traditional emoticon .
one study suggests that the use of a nose in an emoticon may be related to the user 's age .
similar-looking characters are commonly substituted for one another : for instance , codice _ 33 , and codice _ 34 can all be used interchangeably , sometimes for subtly different effect or , in some cases , one type of character may look better in a certain font and therefore be preferred over another .
it is also common for the user to replace the rounded brackets used for the mouth with other , similar brackets , such as codice _ 3 instead of codice _ 3 .
some types are also more common in some countries due to keyboard layouts .
for example , the smiley codice _ 29 may occur in scandinavia , where the keys for codice _ 39 and codice _ 37 are placed right beside each other .
some emoticons can be read right to left instead .
ascii net , an early japanese online service , started in 1986 .
similar-looking emoticons were used on the byte information exchange ieee bixdilly around the same time .
these emoticons are usually found in a format similar to codice _ 1 .
the asterisks indicate the eyes ; the central character , commonly an underscore , the mouth , and the parentheses , the outline of the face .
different emotions can be expressed by changing the character representing the eyes : for example , " t " can be used to express crying or sadness :
codice _ 5 may also be used to mean " unimpressed " .
the emphasis on the eyes in this style is shown in the common usage of emoticons that use only the eyes , e . g .
looks of stress are represented by the likes of codice _ 53 .
codice _ 5 can indicate embarrassment by symbolizing blushing .
alternatively , the mouth / nose can be left out entirely , e . g .
parentheses are sometimes replaced with braces or square brackets .
many times , the parentheses are left out completely , e . g . codice _ 61 , codice _ 62 , codice _ 64 , codice _ 64 , or codice _ 64 .
a quotation mark codice _ 66 , apostrophe codice _ 67 , or semicolon can be added to the emoticon to imply apprehension or embarrassment , in the same way that a sweat drop is used in manga and anime .
such dictionaries allow users to call up emoticons by typing words that represent them .
communication software allowing the use of shift jis encoded japanese characters rather than just ascii allowed for the development of new kaomoji using the extended character set , such as codice _ 69 or codice _ 9 .
modern communication software generally uses unicode , which allows the addition of characters from other languages — e . g . from the cyrillic alphabetigraphy , and a variety of symbols into the kaomoji , as in codice _ 7 or codice _ 72 .
further variations can be produced using unicode combining characters , as in codice _ 3 or codice _ 7 .
english-language anime forums adopted those emoticons that could be used with the standard ascii characters available on western keyboards .
because of this , they are often called " anime style " emoticons in english .
another apparently western invention is the use of emoticons like o . o . or o . o .
_ u . to indicate vampires or other mythical beasts with fangs .
exposure to both western and japanese style emoticons or kaomoji through blogs , instant messaging , and forums featuring a blend of western and japanese pop culture has given rise to many emoticons that have an upright viewing format .
characters are sometimes added to emoticons to convey an anime or manga-styled sweat drop .
in brazil , sometimes combining charactersctus are added to emoticons to represent eyebrows , as in codice _ 11 , o . o .
_ o o .
users of the japanese discussion board 2channel have developed a wide variety of unique emoticons using characters from various languages , such as kannada , as in codice _ 1 for a look of disapproval , disbelief , or confusionization .
some have taken on a life of their own and become characters in their own right , like mona .
in south korea , emoticons use korean hangul letters , and the western style is rarely used .
the structures of korean and japanese emoticons are somewhat similar , but they have some differences .
there are many number of emoticons that can be formed with such combinations of korean jamo letters .
if they are used withtness or – they depict a bad feeling .
it is also commonly used for representing a great admiration aarhus sometimes with an overtone of sarcasm sarcasm compartments for someone else 's view or action .
it was first used in late 2002 at the forum on techside , a japanese personal website .
at the " techside faq forum " egypt is a poster that was shown on a cable and its cover .
others commented that it looked like a kneeling person , and the symbol became popular .
in taiwan , orz is associated with the phrase " nice guy " that is , the concept of males being rejected for a date by girls who are pursuing with a phrase like " you are a nice guy . "
a portmanteau of " emotion " and " sound " , an emotisound is a brief sound transmitted and played back during the viewing of a message , typically an im message or e-mail message .
some services , such as muzicons , combine emoticons and music player in a widget .
the concept is credited to the bradley & montgomery advertising firm .
adobe flash allows users to create a short animation .
users can then email or save their own animations to use them on similar social utility applications .
during the first half of the 2010s , there have been different forms of small audiovisual pieces to be sent through instant messaging systems to express one 's emotion .
current video compression codecs such as h . 264 allow these pieces of video to be light in terms of file size and very portable .
in 2001 , they issued a satirical press release , announcing that they would sue internet users who typed the frowny ; the joke backfired and the company received a storm of protest when its mock release was posted on technology news website slashdot .
for example , discloses a method developed in 2001 to send emoticons over a cell phone using a drop-down menu .
in 2012 , the supreme court said that the emoticon should be trademarked .
in 2005 , a russian court rejected a legal claim against siemens by a man who claimed to hold a trademark on the codice _ 154 emoticon .
smiley faces were present in unicode since 1.1 , including a whiteinkles face , a white smiling face , and a black smiling face .