he is generally considered to be one of the greatest english composers .
henry purcell senior , whose older brother , thomas purcell , covent garden , died 1682 iihf iihf iihf iihf iihf , was a gentleman of the chapel royal and sang at the coronation of charles ii of england .
daniel purcell , the youngest of the brothers , was also a composer who wrote the music for much of the last act of " the indian queen " after henry purcell 's death .
when his father died in 1664 , he was given the guardianship of his uncle , who showed him great affection and kindness .
thomas was a gentleman of his majesty 's chapel , and arranged for henry to be admitted as a chorister .
the composer matthew locke was a friend and had a big influence on the young purcell .
henry sang in the choir until his voice broke in 1673 .
the earliest piece that can be seen as his is an ode for the king 's birthday , written in 1670 .
the song " sweet tyranness , i now resign " was written by him as a child .
we now know that this anthem was composed for the exceptionally fine voice of the rev .
john gostling , then at canterbury , but later a gentleman of his majesty 's chapel .
he wrote several anthems at different times for gostling 's extraordinary basso profondo voice .
in gratitude for the escape of king charles ii from shipwreck , gostling , who had been of the royal party , put together some verses from the psalms in the form of an anthem .
in 1679 blow became organist of westminster abbey .
for six years he devoted himself to the composition of sacred music .
he produced two important works for the stage , the music for nathaniel lee 's " theodosius " , and thomas d ' urfey 's " virtuous wife " .
the first performance may have come before the documented one of 1689 .
the opera was written to a libretto furnished by nahum tate .
it is occasionally considered the first genuine english opera .
at the time , " dido and aeneas " never found its way to the theatre .
it is believed to have been copied , but only one song was printed by purcell 's widow in " orpheus britannicus " .
he composed a very long poem , " dido and aeneas " .
the story of " dido and aeneas " is from the source of virgil 's " aeneid " .
in 1682 purcell became organist of the chapel royal .
for some years after this , he was busy in the production of sacred music , odes addressed to the king and royal family , and other similar works .
in 1690 he composed a setting of the birthday ode for queen mary , " arise , my muse " and four years later wrote one of his most important and magnificent works .
in this year , purcell also composed a march and passepied called " quick-step " .
in 1692 , he composed " the fairy-queen " .
this is probably including " full fathom five " and " come unto these yellow sands " .
in these semi-operas ashore another term for which at the time was " dramatic opera " foley .
the songs are sung " for " them by singers , who have minor dramatic roles .
purcell 's " te deum " and " jubilate deo " were written for saint cecilia 's day , 1694 , the first english " te deum " ever composed with orchestral accompaniment .
this work was performed at st paul 's cathedral until 1712 .
he composed an anthem and two elegies for queen mary ii 's funeral .
he also wrote songs for thomas d ' urfey 's " the comical history of don quixote " , " bonduca " , " the indian queen " and others , a vast quantity of sacred music , and numerous odes , cantatas , and other miscellaneous pieces .
his keyboard music is minimal after his early career .
the music that he had earlier composed for queen mary 's funeral was performed during his funeral .
his wife frances died in 1706 .
purcell worked in many genres , both in works closely linked to the court , such as symphony song , to the chapel royal , such as the symphony anthem , and the theatre .
after his death , purcell was honoured by many of his contemporaries , including his old friend john blow , who wrote " an ode , on the death of mr . henry purcell percival mark how the lark and linnet sing ashore " with text by his old collaborator , john dryden .
william croft 's 1724 setting for the burial service was written in the style of " the great master " .
it has been sung at every british state funeral ever since .
more recently , the english poet gerard manley hopkins wrote a famous sonnet entitled " henry purcell " , with a headnote reading : " the poet wishes well to the divine genius of purcell and praises him that , whereas other musicians have given utterance to the moods of man 's mind , he has , beyond that , made him in the very few species of man and generally made him in the very pure and generally made in the man of man . "
he also had a strong influence on the composers of the english musical renaissance of the early 20th century , most notably benjamin britten .
the aria " i know a bank " from britten 's opera " a midsummer night 's dream " is inspired by purcell 's aria " sweeter than roses " .
purcell is honored with johann sebastian bach and george frideric handel with a feast day on the liturgical calendar of the episcopal church paces usaeux on 28 july .
in a 1940 interview ignaz friedman said that he considered purcell as great as bach and beethoven .
they have been catalogued by franklin zimmerman , who gave them a number before z .
the so-called " purcell 's trumpet voluntary " was written around 1700 by jeremiah clarke as the " prince of denmark 's march " .
in 2009 pete townshend of the who , an english rock band that established itself in the 1960s , identified purcell 's harmonies .
purcell 's music was widely featured as background music in the academy award winning 1979 film " kramer vs . kramer " .
in the 21st century , the soundtrack of the movie version of " pride and prejudice " features a dance titled " a postcard to henry purcell " .
in the german-language movie " downfall " , the music of dido 's lament is used repeatedly as the end of the third reich .
the 2012 movie " moonrise kingdom " contains a version of the rondeau in purcell 's " abdelazar " created for his 1946 " the young person 's guide to the orchestra " .
in 2013 , the pet shop boys released their single " love is a bourgeois construct " .
olivia chaney performs her version of the song " there 's not a swain " on her cd " the longest river " .
