hephaestus kelvin -lrb- greek : " hephaistos " — " hephaistos " -rrb- is the greek god of metalworking , craftsmen , craftsmen , craftsmen , artisans , metallurgy , fire , and volcanoes .
his roman equivalent is vulcan .
hephaestus was the son of zeus and hera .
zeus took hera off mount olympus , by his mother .
hephaestus was a smithing god , and made all the weapons of the gods in olympus .
he was worshipped in the manufacturing and industrial centers of greece , especially athens .
the cult of hephaestus is in the lemnos .
hephaestus ' symbol is a smith 's hammer , an an anvil , and a pair of tongs .
hephaestus is probably associated with the linear bwyla , a-pa-i-ti-jo , found at knossos .
the name of the god in greektown is given to the greek god in greek quantities , and is sometimes used for naming the word " hephaistos " .
hephaestus is given many names .
hephaestus had his own palace on olympus , with his workshop .
hephaestus crafted much of the magnificent equipment of the gods , and almost any wrought metalwork imbued with powers that appears in greek myth is said to have been forged by hephaestus .
he designed the hip hoplite 's helmet , the hip-hops , the shoulder of pelops , and the shoulder of arrows .
in later accounts , hephaestus worked with the help of the chthonic cyclopes , among them his assistants in the forge , brontes , steropes and pyracmon .
hephaestus built a metal to work for him .
they walked to and from mount olympus .
he gave orion his apprentice cedalion to the blind .
in some versions of the myth , prometheus stole the fire that he gave to man from hephaestus 's forge .
hephaestus gave the gift that the gods gave to man , the woman pandora and her pithos .
hephaestus was a skilled blacksmith .
the greek myths and the homeric poems make a lot of motion .
he made the golden and silver lions and dogs at the entrance of the palace of alkinoos so that they could bite the invaders .
the greeks had animistic idea that statues are in some sense alive .
this kind of art goes back to the minoan period , when daedalus , the builder of the labyrinth , made images which moved of their own accord .
a statue of the god was somehow the god himself , and the image on a man 's tomb indicated somehow his presence .
hephaestus was at the birth of athena .
in the later account , hephaestus is there represented as older than athena , so the mythology of hephaestus is inconsistent in this respect .
in one branch of greek mythology , hera ejected hephaestus from the heavens because he was " shrivelled of foot " .
he fell into the ocean and was raised by thetisisance mother of achilles and one of the 50 nereidships and the oceanid eurynome .
hephaestus tried to rescue his mother from zeus ' advances .
he fell for an entire day and landed on the island of lemnos .
later writers describe his lameness as the consequence of his second fall , while homer makes him lame and weak from his birth .
hephaestus was one of the olympians to have returned to olympus after being exiled .
in an archaic story , hephaestus gained revenge against hera for rejecting him by making her a magical golden throne , which , when she sat on it , did not allow her to stand up .
the other gods asked hephaestus to come back to olympus to let her go , but he refused , saying " i have no mother . "
at last , dionysus took the subdued smith back to olympus on the back of a mule .
in the painted scenes , the padded dancers and phallic figures of the dionysan throng leading the mule show that the procession was a part of the dithyrambic celebrations that were the forerunners of the satyr plays of fifth century athens .
the theme of the " return of hephaestus " , popular among the attic vase-painters whose wares were favored among the etruscans , may have introduced this theme to etruria .
in the vase-painters ' portrayal of the procession , hephaestus was mounted on a mule or a horse , with dionysus holding the bridle and carrying hephaestus ' tools aboard .
the traveller pausanias reported seeing a painting in the temple of dionysus in athens , which had been built in the 5th century but may have been decorated at any time before the 2nd century ce .
when pausanias saw it , he said : " according to most versions , hephaestus 's consort is aphrodite , who is unfaithful to hephaestus with a number of gods and mortals , including ares .
in book xviii of homer 's " iliad " , the consort of hephaestus is a lesser aphrodite , charistress .
in athens , there is a temple of hephaestus , the " hephaesteum " reused the " theseum " restroom near the agora .
the city 's patron goddess , athena , refused a union with hephaestus .
pseudo-apollodorus records an ancient legend , which says that hephaestus once tried to rape athena , but she pushed him away , causing him to ejaculate on her thigh .
athena wiped the semen off using a tuft of wool , which she tossed into the dust , impregnating gaia and causing her to give birth to erichthonius , whom athena adopted as her own child .
the roman mythographer hyginus says that hephaestus demanded zeus to let him marry athena .
zeus agreed to this and hephaestus and athena were married , but when hephaestus was about to consummate the union , athena vanished from the bridal bed , causing him to ejaculate on the floor , thus impregnating gaia with erichthonius .
on the island of lemnos , hephaestus was the sea nymph cabeiro .
his wife was the nymph aetna .
with thalia , hephaestus was sometimes considered the father of the palici .
hephaestus fathered several children with mortals and immortals alike .
one of those children was the robber periphetes .
he was married to hephaestus , but aphrodite had an affair with ares , the god of war .
eventually , hephaestus discovered aphrodite ’ s affair through helios , the all-seeing sun , and planned a trap during one of their trysts .
while aphrodite and ares lay together in bed , hephaestus ensnared them in an unbreakable chain-link net so small as to be invisible and dragged them to mount olympus to shame them in front of the gods for retribution .
the gods laughed at the sight of these naked lovers .
hephaestus said in " the odyssey " that he would return aphrodite to her father and demand back his bride price .
the the the the the the thebans told that the union of ares and aphrodite produced harmonia .
virgil was serious when he said that eros was their child .
later authors explain this statement by saying that eros was sired by ares but passed off to hephaestus as his own son .
hephaestus was connected with the archaic , pre-greek phrygian and thracian mystery cult of the kabeiroi , who were also called the " hephaestus-men " , in lemnos .
one of the three lemnian tribes also called themselves hephaestion and claimed direct descent from the god .
hephaestus is to the male gods as athena is to the females .
he was considered to be much inferior to the sublime character of athena .
at athens they had many temples and festivals .
both were believed to have great healing powers , and lemnian earthworm terra lemniachus from the spot on which hephaestus had fallen was believed to cure madness , the bites of snakes , and haemorrhage , and priests of hephaestus knew how to cure wounds caused by snakes .
he was represented in the temple of athena chalcioecus equestrian athena of the bronze housevira at sparta , in the act of delivering his mother ; on the chest of cypselus , giving achilles 's armour to thetis ; and at athens there was the famous statue of hephaestus by alcamenes , in which his lameness was portrayed by alcamenes .
the greeks frequently placed small dwarf-like statues of hephaestus near their hearths , and these figures are the oldest of all his pictures .
during the best period of grecian art he was represented as a vigorous man with a beard .
athena is sometimes thought to be the ‘ soul-mate ’ of hephaestus .
no single tradition was ever clearly established on this subject , and so what confronts us is a blurred image based on rumors and conflicting reports . "
nonetheless , he " seeks impetuously and passionately to make love to athena .
hephaestus was associated by greek colonists in southern italy with the volcano gods adranusttered of mount etnadilly and vulcanus of the lipari islands .
the first-century sage apollonius of tyana is said to have observed , " there are many other mountains all over the earth that are on fire , and yet we should never be done with it if we assigned to them giants and gods like hephaestus " .
he was also worshiped by the greeks and saved one of their men from being killed by diomedes .
hephaestus ’ favourite place in the mortal world was the island of lemnos , where he liked to dwell among the sintians , but he also frequented other volcanic islands such as lipara , hiera , imbros and sicily , which were called his abodes or workshops .
hephaestus is known by the poets generally allude to his skill in the plastic arts or to his figure or lameness .
the greeks frequently placed small dwarf-like statues of hephaestus near their hearths , and these figures are the oldest of all his pictures .
hephaestus was sometimes described as a vigorous man with a beard .
hephaestus is described in mythological sources as " lame " , and " halting " .
he was depicted with crippled feet and as misshapen , either from birth or as a result of his fall from olympus .
in vase paintings , hephaestus is usually shown lame and bent over his anvil , hard at work on a metal creation , and sometimes with his feet back-to-front : " hephaistos amphigyeeis " .
he walked with the aid of a stick .
the argonaut palaimonius , " son of hephaestus "clotheista " , was lame .
other " sons of hephaestus " were the cabeiri on the island of samothrace , who were identified with the crab abbess " karkinos "arth by the lexicographer hesychius .
the adjective " karkinopous " crab-footed " refers to the adjective " lame " , which is used to describe the noun " karkinopous " .
the cabeiri were lame .
in some stories , hephaestus built himself a " wheeled chair " or chariot with which to move around .
in the " iliad " 18.371 , it is said that hephaestus built twenty bronze wheeled tripods to help him in moving around .
hephaestus ’ s ugly appearance and lameness is taken by some to represent peripheral neuropathy and skin cancer resulting from arsenicosis caused by arsenic in metalworking .
bronze age smiths added arsenic to make copper .
many bronze age smiths would have suffered from arsenic poisoning as a result of their livelihood .
the mythic image of the lame smith is widespread .
the connection is one from ancient folk memory .
the minor planet 2212 hephaistos discovered in 1978 by soviet astronomer lyudmila chernykh was named in hephaestus ' honour .
