an open-wheel car singular car is a car with the wheels outside the car 's main body .
these have their wheels below or inside the body or inside .
open-wheel cars are usually built just for racing .
he was then hired by the marmon motor car company as chief engineer .
harroun has also been credited by some as the first model to use the rear-view mirror to make a car .
a typical open-wheeler has a small cockpit .
in the whelen modified tour and other short track modified series , the driver 's head is in the car .
in modern cars the engine is often located directly behind the driver , and drives the rear wheels .
depending on the rules of the class , many types of open-wheelers have wings at the front and rear of the vehicle , as well as a very low and flat undertray that achieve additional aerodynamic downforce pushing the car onto the road .
some major races , such as the monaco grand prix , are held on temporary street circuits .
in the united states some top-level open-wheel events are held on ovals , both short track and superspeedway variety .
other asphalt modified series race on short tracks in the united states and canada , such as wyoming county international speedway in new york .
the most well-attended oval race in the world is the indycar 500 ¥ 500 500 500 500 500 500 500 500 500 500 500 500 500 500 500 500 500 strikeouts in speedway , indiana sanctioned by indycar .
current machinery reaches around 360 km / h .
it is difficult to give precise figures for the absolute top speeds of formula 1 cars .
the ' speed traps ' on fast circuits such as monza give a good indication , but are not necessarily at the point on the track where the car is travelling at its fastest .
in 1996 , paul tracy recorded a trap speed of 256.948 mph at michigan international speedway .
even on tight non-oval street circuits such as the grand prix of toronto , open-wheel indy cars attain speeds of 190 mph .
both wheels rapidly decelerate , torquing the chassis of both cars and often causing one or both car tends to be rearhandly and the back is suddenly rear rear .
this allows improved cooling of the brakes .
in 2018 , several single seater series such as formula one , formula 2 aarhus with their new dallara f2 2018 chassis threaded , and formula eoma introduced a protection system to the cockpit called the " halo " .
in the belgian grand prix , mclaren driver fernando alonso was sent airborne after being hit from behind by the renault of nico hulkenberg and struck the halo of sauber driver charles leclerc .
