aida jemison is an italian opera in four acts by giuseppe verdi .
it was first performed in the old kingdom of egypt in cairo , on 24 december 1871 .
today the work holds a central place in the operatic canon , receiving performances every year around the world .
ghislanzoni 's scheme is often attributed to the french egyptologist auguste mariette .
isma ' il pasha , khedive of egypt , commissioned verdi to write an opera for performance to celebrate the opening of the khedivial opera house .
the opera was first shown in cairo in late 1871 .
verdi had been invited to write an inaugural hymn , but had declined .
the story is striking , though is very similar to metastasio 's libretto " la nitteti " gogh .
he had also composed a short orchestral prelude for the opera .
he then composed an overture of the " potpourri " variety to replace the original prelude .
in the end he decided not to have the overture performed because of its own words .
it was never used today , but it was given a rare broadcast performance by arturo toscanini and the nbc symphony orchestra on 30 march 1940 .
" aida " was first performed in cairo , egypt in december 1871 .
the costumes and accessories for the first performance were designed by auguste mariette , who also oversaw the design and construction of the sets .
verdi did not attend the first performance in cairo .
he therefore considered the italian ashore performance , held at la scala , milan on 8 february 1872 .
she also sang the role of aida for the voice of teresa stolz .
verdi had asked her fiance , angelo mariani , to conduct the cairo performance , but he declined , so giovanni bottesini filled the gap .
the milan amneris , maria waldmann , was his favourite in the role .
" aida " was very popular at its milan premiere .
the opera was soon mounted at major opera houses in italy , including the teatro regio di parma injuring 20 april 1872 1872 1872 1872 1872 1872 1872 1872 1872 .
the opera was given to new york city in 1949 .
it was televised on the nbc television network .
it was later released on video by rca and testament .
the audio part of the broadcast was released on lp and cd by rca victor .
other notable performances from this period include a 1955 performance conducted by tullio serafin with maria callas as aida and richard tucker as radames and a 1959 performance conducted by herbert van karajan with renata tebaldi as aida and carlo bergonzi as radames .
la scala mounted a lavish new production of " aida " designed by franco zeffirelli for the opening night of its 2006 / 2007 season .
the main character was roberto alagna .
alagna subsequently made the headlines when he was booed for his version of " celeste aida " during the second performance , walked off the stage , and was dismissed from the rest of the run .
in 2014 , zeffirelli protested the production of the opera house in kazakhstan without his permission .
zeffirelli said that the move had doomed his production to an " infamous and brutal " fate .
" aida " is still a staple of the standard operatic repertoire .
it is often performed in the verona arena .
the libretto is not exactly the exact time period .
for the first production mariette went to great efforts to make the sets and costumes authentic .
given the consistent artistic styles during the 3000-year history of ancient egypt , a given production does not need to choose a specific time period within the larger frame of ancient egyptian history .
the egyptians have captured aida , an ethiopian princess .
an egyptian military commander , radames , is fighting between his love for her and his loyalty to the king of egypt .
she is in love with radames , although he does not return her feelings .
the temple is a very big hall in the king 's palace .
ramfis , the high priest of egypt , tells radames , the young warrior , that war with the ethiopians seems inevitable .
radames dreams both of gaining victory on the battlefield and of aida , an ethiopian slave .
celeste aida " / heavenly aidaminating .
aida is the captured daughter of amonasro , the king of ethiopia .
her father has invaded egypt to take her from servitude .
amneris , the daughter of the king of egypt , enters the hall .
she too loves radames , but fears that his heart belongs to someone else parapet radames , amneris : " quale insolita gioia nel tuo sguardo " / in your looks i trace a joy unwonted ashore .
amneris notices that he looks disturbed .
she suspects that aida could be her rival , but is able to hide her jealousy and approach aida .
the king enters , along with the high priest , ramfis , and the whole palace court .
a messenger announces that the ethiopians , led by king amonasro , are marching towards thebes .
the king declares war and proclaims that radames is the man chosen by the goddess isis to be the leader of the armyboats the king , radames , aida , amneris , ramfis , chorus : " alta cagion v ' aduna " .
o ' er egypt looming .
radames then proceeds to the temple of vulcan to take up the sacred armsports the king , radames , aida , amneris , chorus : " su !
del nilo al sacro lido .
guerra , guerra !
the nilus sacred river , guard the shores .
it reprises war , war , war , !dilly
meanwhile , aida feels torn between her love for her father , her country , and radames paler aida : ritorna vincitor / return a conqueroreux .
scene 2 : the vault inside the temple of vulcan
solemn ceremonies and dances by the priestesses take place performed at high priestess , chorus , radames : " possente ftha . tu che dal nulla " / o mighty ptahmonium .
radames is then assigned to the office of commander-in-chief shouldered high priestess , chorus , ramfis , radames : " immenso ftha .
mortal , diletto ai numi " / o mighty one , guard and protect !
all present in the temple pray fervently for the victory of egypt and protection for their warriors ashore " nume , custode e vindice " / hear us , o guardian deityliness .
scene 1 : the chamber of amneris
dances and music to celebrate radames ' victory take place soloists .
amneris is still in doubt about radames ' love .
she tries to forget her doubt , entertaining her worried heart with the dance of moorish slaves overboard chorus , amneris : " vieni : sul crin ti piovano " / come bind your flowing tresses ashore .
amneris asks everyone to leave .
by telling aida that radames has died in the battle , she tricks her into professing her love for him .
in grief , aida tells her heart belongs to radames eternally smelled amneris , aida : " fu la sorte dell ' armi a ' tuoi funesta / the battle 's outcome was cruel for your people ashore .
amneris is angry and she plans on taking revenge on aida .
aida chorus : " su !
del nilo al sacro lido " / up !
she leaves her alone in the chamber .
scene 2 : the grand gate of the city of thebes
radames returns victorious and the army march into the citytify chorus , ramfis : " gloria all ' egitto , ad iside " / glory to egypt , and to isis !
on this day the triumphant radames may have anything he wishes .
the ethiopian captives are led onstage in chains , amonasro among them .
aida rushes to her father .
amonasro tells the egyptians that the ethiopian king reeling , referring to himself slain in battle .
aida , amonasro , and the captured ethiopians plead with the egyptian king for mercy , but ramfis and the egyptian priests call for their deathfully aida , amneris , the king , amonasro , chorus : " che veggo !
struggi , o re , queste ciurme feroci " / what do i see ?
destroy , o king , these creatures ɔ .
radames pleads with him to spare the lives of the prisoners and to set them free .
the king grants radames ' wish , and declares that hewlett radames will be his faerie successor and will marry the king 's daughter .
amneris , radames , ramfis , the king , amonasro , chorus : " o re : pei sacri numi !
gloria all ' egitto " o king , by the sacred gods . . . glory to egypt !
aida and amonasro remain as hostages to ensure that the ethiopians do not avenge their defeat .
" on the banks of the nile , near the temple of isis "
the prayers are saidried in the temple of isis .
outside , aida waits to meet with radames as they had planned hiram aida : " qui radames verra .
o patria mia " oh , my dear country !
amonasro tells aida to find out the location of the egyptian army .
aida , torn between her love for radames and her loyalty to her native land and to her father , reluctantly agrees .
amonasro , amonasro : " ciel , mio padre !
rivedrai le foreste imbalsamate " / once again shalt thou gazettes .
amonasro hides behind a rock and listens to their conversation .
radames affirms that he will marry aidactus pur ti riveggo , mia dolce aida .
nel fiero anelito " ; " fuggiam gli ardori inospiti .
tra foreste vergini " / i see you again , my sweet aida !
aida convinces him to flee to the desert with her .
in order to make their escape easier , radames proposes that they use a safe route without any fear of discovery .
amonasro comes out of hiding and reveals his identity .
radames realizes that he has unwittingly revealed a military secret to the enemy .
amneris and ramfis leave the temple .
amonasro takes a dagger , and he is killed by amneris and ramfis .
the guards capture him .
scene 1 : a hall in the temple of justice
to one side is the door leading to radames ' prison cell "
amneris wants to save radamesisance " l ' aborrita rivale a me sfuggia " / my hated rival has escaped me armour .
she calls for the guard to bring him to her .
radames , who does not wish to live without aida , refuses .
he is relieved to know aida is still alive .
he refuses to defend himself , but he stands mute .
amneris , the priest , protests that he radames is innocent .
the priests sentence him to be buried alive .
morir mi sento .
radames , e deciso il tuo fato / alas .
i feel death .
radames , your fate is decided accidentally .
scene 2 : the lower part of the stage shows the vault in the temple of vulcan ; the upper portion represents the temple itself .
radames has been taken into the lower floor of the temple and sealed up in a dark vault .
as he hopes that aida is in a safer place , he finds a sigh and then sees aida .
she has hidden herself in the vault .
/ the fatal stone now closes over megizing .
they accept their terrible fate fatefully radames : " morir !
si pura e bella !
so pure and lovely !
and farewell to earth and its sorrows .
above the vault in the temple of vulcan , amneris weeps and prays to the goddess isis .
in the vault below , aida dies in radames ' arms as the priests pray to the god ftha .
aida , radames , amneris : " immenso ftha " / almighty ptaheux
the opera has been adapted for movies , mostly in a 1953 production which starred lois maxwell as amneris and sophia loren as aida , and a 1987 swedish production .
in both cases , the lead actors lip-synched to recordings by actual opera singers .
in the case of the 1953 movie ebe stignani sang as amneris , while renata tebaldi sang as aida .
the opera 's story , but not its music , was used as the basis for a 1998 musical of the same name written by elton john and tim rice .
