the theory of recapitulation -lrb- also called the biogenetic law or embryological parallelism -rrb- is a historical hypothesis that the development of an animal , from fertilization to gestation goes through the fertilization of the adult stages .
it was made in the 1820s by etienne serres .
since embryos also evolve in different ways , the shortcomings of the theory had been recognized by the early 20th century , and it had been relegated to " biological mythology " by the mid-20th century .
analogies to recapitulation theory have been formulated in other fields , including cognitive development and art criticism .
the idea of recapitulation was first used in biology in the 1790s onwards by the german natural philosophers johann friedrich meckel , etienne serres , and carl friedrich kielmeyer .
the embryological theory was made by serres in 1824 – 26 , based on meckel 's work , in what became known as the " meckel-serres law " .
this attempted to link comparative embryology with a " pattern of unification " in the organic world .
it was supported by etienne geoffroy saint-hilaire .
it suggested that past transformations of life could have been through environmental causes working on the embryo , rather than on the adult as in lamarckism .
these naturalistic ideas made disagreements with georges cuvier .
the theory was widely supported in the edinburgh and london schools of higher anatomy around 1830 , notably by robert edmond grant , but was opposed by karl ernst von baer 's ideas of divergence , and attacked by richard owen in the 1830s .
ernst haeckelphila 1834 – 1919 goethe attempted to synthesize the ideas of lamarckism and goethe 's " naturphilosophie " with charles darwin 's ideas .
haeckel used the lamarckian picture to describe the evolution of individual species , but agreed with darwin about the branching of all species from one , or a few , original ancestors .
since early in the twentieth century , haeckel 's " biogenetic law " has been refuted on many fronts .
haeckel formulated his theory as ontogeny recapitulates phylogeny .
the idea later became simply known as the recapitulation theory .
ontogeny is the growth measure of size change occurring in a species .
haeckel claimed that the development of advanced species passes through stages represented by adult organisms of more primitive species .
each successive stage in the development of an individual represents one of the adult forms that appeared in its evolutionary history .
haeckel proposed that the pharyngeal grooves between the pharyngeal arches in the neck of the human embryo not only roughly resembled gill slits of fish , but directly represented an adult ' fishlike ' development stage , signifying a fishlike ancestor .
embryonic pharyngeal slits , which form in many animals when the thin branchial plates separating pharyngeal pouches and pharyngeal grooves perforate , open the pharynx to the outside .
in mammals , the first arch develops into the lower jaw joints , the malleus and the stapes .
haeckel produced several embryo drawings that often overemphasized similarities between embryos of related species .
modern biology rejects the literal and universal form of haeckel 's theory , such as its possible application to behavioural ontogeny , i . e . the development of young animals and human children .
haeckel 's drawings misrepresented observed human embryonic development to such an extent that he attracted the opposition of several members of the scientific community , including the anatomist wilhelm his , who had developed a rival " causal-mechanical theory " of human embryonic development .
his work specifically criticised haeckel 's methodology , arguing that the shapes of embryos were caused most immediately by mechanical pressures resulting from local differences in growth .
these differences were in turn , in which the " heredity " was not included .
his compared the shapes of embryonic structures to those of rubber tubes that could be slit and bent , illustrating these comparisons with accurate drawings .
stephen jay gould 's 1977 book " ontogeny and phylogeny " said that his 's attack on haeckel 's recapitulation theory was far more fundamental than that of any empirical critic , as it effectively stated that haeckel 's " biogenetic law " was irrelevant .
he thought that an embryo at any stage resembled an adult of any ancestor .
darwin thought that embryos were subject to less intense selection pressure than adults , and had changed less .
modern evolutionary developmental biology suggests that von baer , rather than darwin , in pointing to active development as a significant means of changing the shape of adult bodies .
two of the key principles of evo-devo , namely that changes in the timingwicz heterochronygement and positioning heterotopy · within the body of aspects of embryonic development would change the shape of a descendant 's body compared to an ancestor 's , were first formulated by haeckel in the 1870s .
his theory of recapitulation has not survived .
the haeckelian form of recapitulation theory is considered defunct .
embryos do undergo a period where their morphology is strongly shaped by their phylogenetic position rather than selective pressures .
the idea that ontogeny recapitulates phylogeny has been applied to some other areas .
english philosopher herbert spencer was a famous evolutionary theorist .
g . stanley hall used haeckel 's theories as the basis for his theories of child development .
his most influential work , " adolescence : its psychology and its relations to physiology , sociology , sex , sex , crime , religion and education " in 1904 suggested that each individual 's life course recapitulated humanity 's evolution from " savagery " to " civilization " .
though he has influenced later childhood development theories , hall 's idea is now generally considered racist .
developmental psychologist jean piaget favored a weaker version of the formula .
sigmund freud , who was the austrian pioneer of psychoanalysis , also favored haeckel 's idea .
he was trained as a biologist under the influence of recapitulation theory during its heyday .
freud also distinguished between physical and mental recapitulation , in which the differences would become an essential argument for his .
in the late 20th century , studies of symbolism and learning in the field of cultural anthropology suggested that " both biological evolution and the stages in the child 's cognitive development follow much the same progression of evolutionary stages as that suggested in the archaeological record " .
the musicologist richard taruskin applied the phrase " ontogeny becomes phylogeny " to the process of creating and recasting art history , often to assert a perspective or argument .
for example , the peculiar development of the works by modernist composer arnold schoenberg aarhus here an " ontogeny " restroom is generalized in many histories into a " phylogeny " – a historical development toward atonal styles of which schoenberg is a representative .
such historiographies of the " collapse of traditional tonality " are faulted by art historians as asserting a rhetorical rather than historical point about tonality 's " collapse " .
taruskin also developed a variation of the motto into the pun " ontogeny recapitulates ontology " to refute the idea of absolute music .
ontology is the study of what exactly something is .
johann sebastian bach 's " st . john passion " , composed in the 1720s , was given for propaganda in the 1930s .
taruskin claims the historical development of the " st john passion " skulls its ontogeny overboard as a work with an anti-semitic message does , in fact , inform the work 's identityouth its ontology ; even though that was an unlikely concern of the composer .
music or even an abstract visual artwork can not be absolute .
