the term refers to a fallacious argumentative strategy in which genuine discussion of the topic at hand is avoided by instead attacking the character , motive , or other attribute of the argument , or persons associated with the argument itself .
the terms " mulierem " and " ad feminam " have been used when the person receiving the criticism is female .
fallacious " ad hominem " reasoning is a fallacy in the fallacies of irrelevance .
however , the term 's original meaning was an argument " calculated to appeal to the person addressed more than to impartial reason " .
under this meaning the term does not refer to a logical fallacy .
this meaning survives in philosophical usage , as explained by the philosopher r . scott bakker : " classical pyrrhonians argued ad hominem , not in the sense of the logical fallacy of that name , but in the sense that their dialectical strategy necessitates the exclusive use of the beliefs , convictions , and convictions of their beliefs . "
in other words , they construct their arguments on the basis of what other people hold to be true .
" ad hominem tu quoque " is a claim that the source making the argument has acted in a way inconsistent with the argument .
in particular , if source a criticizes the actions of source b , a " tu quoque " response is that source a has acted in the same way .
this argument is invalid because it does not disprove the premise ; if the premise is true then source a may be a hypocrite , but this does not make the statement less credible from a logical perspective .
source a may be in a position to provide personal testimony to support the argument .
for example , a father may tell the son not to start smoking when he is older , and the son may point out that his father is or was a smoker .
this does not change the fact that his son may regret smoking when he is older .
" circumstantial ad hominem " points out that someone is in circumstances such that they are disposed to take a particular position .
it is an attack on bias of a source .
this is a fallacious case because a disposition to make a certain argument does not make the argument invalid .
the fallacy does not apply where the source is taking a position by using a logical argument based solely on premises that are generally accepted .
observation of their circumstances may reduce the evidentiary weight of the claims , sometimes to zero .
guilt by association can sometimes be a type of " ad hominem " fallacy if the argument attacks a source .
an example of this fallacy could be " my opponent for office just received an endorsement from the puppy haters association .
is that the sort of person you would want to vote for ? "
in philosophical usage , " ad hominem " refers to a dialectical strategy involving the use of the beliefs , convictions , and assumptions of those holding the position being argued against , i . e . , arguments constructed on the basis of what other people hold to be true .
when a statement is challenged by making an " ad hominem " attack on its author , it is important to draw a difference between whether the statement in question was " an argument " or " a statement of fact " testimony "fication .
in the latter case the issues of the credibility of the person making the statement may be crucial .
it should also be noted that an ad hominem fallacy occurs when someone attacks the character of an interlocutor in an attempt to refute their argument .
insulting someone is not necessarily an instance of an ad hominem fallacy .
for example , if one supplies sufficient reasons to reject an interlocutor 's argument and adds a slight character attack at the end , this character attack is not necessarily fallacious .
whether it is fallacious depends on whether or not the insult is used as a reason against the interlocutor 's argument .
an ad hominem is a move where an attack on the interlocutor 's character acts as a response to an interlocutor 's argument / claim .
canadian academic and the author doug walton has argued that " ad hominem " reasoning is not always fallacious , and that questions of personal conduct , motives , etc . are legitimate and relevant to the issue , as when it directly involves hypocrisy , or actions contradicting the subject 's words .
the philosopher charles taylor argued that " ad hominem " reasoning suggests that the speaker or author relative to the value of his statements is essential to understanding certain moral issues due to the connection between individual persons and moralityoslav or moral claimseux .
