the term refers to a fallacious argumentative strategy in which genuine discussion of the topic at hand is avoided by instead attacking the character , motive , or other attribute of the argument , or persons associated with the argument itself .
however , the term 's original meaning was an argument " calculated to appeal to the person addressed more than to impartial reason " .
under this meaning the term does not refer to a logical fallacy .
this meaning survives in philosophical usage , as explained by the philosopher r . scott bakker : " classical pyrrhonians argued ad hominem , not in the sense of the logical fallacy of that name , but in the sense that their dialectical strategy necessitates the exclusive use of the beliefs , convictions , and convictions of their beliefs . "
in other words , they construct their arguments on the basis of what other people hold to be true .
"
this argument is invalid because it does not disprove the premise ; if the premise is true then source a may be a hypocrite , but this does not make the statement less credible from a logical perspective .
this is a fallacious case because a disposition to make a certain argument does not make the argument invalid .
guilt by association can sometimes be a type of " ad hominem " fallacy if the argument attacks a source .
in philosophical usage , " ad hominem " refers to a dialectical strategy involving the use of the beliefs , convictions , and assumptions of those holding the position being argued against , i . e . , arguments constructed on the basis of what other people hold to be true .
when a statement is challenged by making an " ad hominem " attack on its author , it is important to draw a difference between whether the statement in question was " an argument " or " a statement of fact " testimony "fication .
in the latter case the issues of the credibility of the person making the statement may be crucial .
it should also be noted that an ad hominem fallacy occurs when someone attacks the character of an interlocutor in an attempt to refute their argument .
for example , if one supplies sufficient reasons to reject an interlocutor 's argument and adds a slight character attack at the end , this character attack is not necessarily fallacious .
whether it is fallacious depends on whether or not the insult is used as a reason against the interlocutor 's argument .
an ad hominem is a move where an attack on the interlocutor 's character acts as a response to an interlocutor 's argument / claim .
are legitimate and relevant to the issue , as when it directly involves hypocrisy , or actions contradicting the subject 's words .
the philosopher charles taylor argued that " ad hominem " reasoning suggests that the speaker or author relative to the value of his statements is essential to understanding certain moral issues due to the connection between individual persons and moralityoslav or moral claimseux .