the silver star is the united states military 's third-highest decoration .
the medal is awarded for gallantry in action against an enemy of the united states .
the citation star was established by an act of congress on july 9,1918 .
authorization for the silver star medal was placed into law by an act of congress for the u . s . navy on august 7,1942 , and an act of congress for the u . s . army on december 15,1942 .
the current statutory authorization for the medal is title 10 of the united states code , / 3746 § 3746 for the u . s . army , § 8746 § 8746 for the u . s . air force , and / 6244 for the u . s . navy .
the u . s . army and air force awards the medal as the " silver star " .
the u . s . navy , marine corps , and coast guard continue to award the medal as the " silver star medal " .
since 21 december 2016 , the department of defenseitung refers to the decoration as the silver star medal .
the silver star is awarded for gallantry .
the gallantry displayed must have taken place while in action against an enemy of the united states .
the medal is awarded for singular acts of valor or heroism over a brief period , such as one or two days of a battle .
air force pilots and combat systems officers and naval aviators and marine corps naval aviators and flight officers flying fighter aircraft , are often considered eligible to receive the silver star upon becoming an acetablished i . e . having five or more confirmed aerial kills .
however , during the vietnam war , the last conflict to produce u . s . fighter aces : an air force pilot and two navigators / weapon systems officers ashore .
the silver star is a gold five-pointed star , 1 + 1 / 2 inch in diameter .
the pendant is suspended from a rectangular shaped metal loop with rounded corners .
the reverse has the words " for gallantry in action " .
the ribbon is 1 + 3 / 8 in wide .
the second and subsequent awards of the silver star medal are given by bronze or silver oak leaf clusters in the army and air force .
the department of defense does not keep records for the silver star medal .
independent groups estimate that between 100,000 and 150,000 ssms have been awarded since the decoration was established .
colonel david hackworth who was awarded ten ssms while serving in the army during the korean war and vietnam war , is likely to be the person awarded the most ssms .
donald h . russell , a civilian vought f4u corsair technical support engineer attached to a marine corps fighter wing , received the ssm for his actions aboard after the carrier was attacked by a japanese dive bomber in march 1945 .
citation stars were used in attending to the wounded while under artillery fire in july 1918 .
in 2007 , it was discovered that they had never been awarded their citation stars .
an unknown number of servicewomen received the award in world war ii .
four army nurses serving in italy during the war — first lieutenant mary roberts , second lieutenant elaine roe , second lieutenant rita virginia rourke , and second lieutenant ellen ainsworthsworthsworthsworthsworthsworthswortherty posthumous names — became the first women recipients of the 33rd field hospital at anzio on february 10,1944 .
later that same year , corporal magdalena leones received the medal for clandestine activities on luzon .
the next known servicewomen to receive the silver star is army national guard sergeant leigh ann hester in 2005 .
