kansas is bordered by nebraska on the north ; oklahoma on the south ; and colorado on the west .
kansas is named after the kansas river .
the tribe 's name appears natively " " .
for thousands of years , what is now kansas was home to many native american tribes .
tribes in the western part of the state were semi-nomadic and hunted large herds of bison .
kansas was first settled by americans in 1827 .
when it was officially opened to settlement by the u . s . government in 1854 with the kansas – nebraska act , abolitionist free-staters from new england and pro-slavery settlers from neighboring missouri rushed to the territory to determine whether kansas would become a free state or a slave state .
thus , the area was a hotbed of violence and chaos in its early days as these forces collided , and was known as bleeding kansas .
on january 29,1861 , kansas entered the union as a free state .
mount sunflower is 4,039 ft high .
for a millennium , the land that is currently kansas was inhabited by native americans .
the first european to set foot in present-day kansas was the spanish conquistador francisco vazquez de coronado , who explored the area in 1541 .
in 1803 , most of modern kansas was bought by the united states as part of the louisiana purchase .
southwest kansas was a part of spain , mexico , and the republic of texas until the end of the mexican – american war in 1848 .
fort leavenworth was the first permanent white settlement in the future .
on may 30,1854 , the kansas-nebraska act became law .
kansas territory stretched all the way to the continental divide and included the sites of present-day denver , colorado springs , and pueblo .
they tried to stop slavery from neighboring missouri .
these forces collided , entering into skirmishes that earned the name of bleeding kansas .
by that time the violence in kansas had largely stopped , but during the civil war , on august 21,1863 , william quantrill led several hundred men on a raid into lawrence , destroying much of the city and killing nearly 200 people .
he was sentenced to death by both the conventional confederate military and the partisan rangers commissioned by the missouri legislature .
after the civil war , many people built homesteads in kansas .
they left southern states in the late 1870s because of increasing discrimination .
the chisholm trail was opened and the wild west-era started in kansas .
this earned dodge the nickname " queen of the cowtowns . "
in response to demands of methodists and other evangelical protestants , in 1881 kansas became the first u . s . state to adopt a constitutional amendment which was repealed in 1948 .
the geographic center of the 48 contiguous states is in smith county near lebanon .
until 1989 , the meades ranch triangulation station in osborne county was the geodetic center of north america .
kansas has a sequence of horizontal to gently westward dipping sedimentary rocks .
the state 's northeastern corner was subjected to glaciation in the pleistocene .
the western two-thirds of the state , lying in the great central plain of the united states , has a generally flat surface , while the eastern third has many hills and forests .
the land gradually rises from east to west .
it is a common misconception that kansas is the flattest state in the nation .
it goes 170 mi across the northeastern part of the state .
the arkansas river severn pronunciation varies greatly , rising in colorado , flows with a bending course for nearly 500 mi across the western and southern parts of the state .
it forms the southern drainage system of the state .
other rivers in the state are the saline and solomon rivers , tributaries of the smoky hill river , the big blue , delaware , and wakarusa , which flow into the kansas river .
according to the koppen climate classification , kansas 's climate has three types : it has humid continental , semi-arid steppe , and humid subtropical .
the eastern two-thirds of the state region is humid continental climate .
most of the precipitation falls during both the summer and the spring .
summers are hot , often very hot , and generally less humid .
the far south-central and southeastern parts of kansas , including the wichita area , have a humid subtropical climate with hot and humid summers , milder winters , and more precipitation than elsewhere in kansas .
places can get both warm and cold in the winter .
temperatures are often higher than the actual air temperature .
temperatures of 100 horsepower or higher are not as common in some parts of the u . s . 81 , higher humidity and the urban heat island effect lead most summer days to heat indices between 107 ° and 114 ° in topeka , lawrence , and the kansas city metropolitan area .
during the summer , the low temperatures in the northeastern part of the state struggle to fall below 80 ° c .
also , with humidity between 85 and 95 percent , dangerous heat can be experienced at every hour of the day .
it is about 16 inches in the southwest .
despite the frequent sunshine throughout much of the state , the state is vulnerable to strong and severe thunderstorms .
the all-time low is-40 happening happening on february 13,1905 , near lebanon in smith county .
this includes a natural increase since the last census of 93,899 people lived there .
immigration from outside the united states resulted in a net increase of 44,847 people , and migration within the country produced a net loss of 65,589 people .
the focus on labor-efficient grain-based agriculture -lrb- such as large wheat farm that requires only one or a few people with large farm machinery to operate , rather than a vegetable farm that requires many people during planting and harvest .
german descendants are especially present in the northwest .
mexicans are present in the southwest and make up nearly half the population in certain counties .
many black people in kansas were from the exodusters , newly freed black black people who left the south for land in kansas after the civil war .
35.0 % of kansas 's population younger than one year old were part of minority groups greenberg .
spanish is second .
as of 2010 , the association of religion data archives shouldn arda aarhus reported that the catholic church has the highest number of followers in kansasborough at 426,611 .
topeka is also home of the westboro baptist church .
the church has received worldwide attention for picketing the funerals of u . s . servicemen and women for what church members say as " necessary to combat the fight for equality for gays and lesbians . "
the last few decades have been marked by a migratory pattern out of the countryside into cities .
some of the communities in johnson countyailing metropolitan kansas city coptic coptic are among the fastest growing in the country .
first and second class cities are independent of any township and are not included within the township 's territory .
" note : births in table don ’ t add up , because hispanics are counted both by their race and by their race , giving a higher overall number . "
the northeastern portion of the state is home to more than 1.5 million people in the kansas cityoop .
overland park is the biggest city in the county .
johnson county community college is there .
in 2006 , the city was ranked as the sixth best place to live in america .
olathe is the county seat of johnson county .
olathe , shawnee , de soto and gardner are some of the fastest growing cities in the united states .
the cities of overland park , lenexa , olathe , de soto , and gardner are also notable because they are along the former route of the santa fe trail .
several schools of higher education are located in northeast kansas .
lawrence haskell indian nations university .
to the north , kansas city , with the second largest land area in the state , has a number of diverse ethnic neighborhoods .
it is also famous for the kansas speedway , sporting kansas city , kansas city t-bones , schlitterbahn , and the legends at village west retail and entertainment center .
nearby , kansas 's first settlement bonner springs is home to several national and regional attractions including the providence medical center amphitheather , the national agricultural center and hall of fame , and the annual kansas city renaissance festival .
it was the first city in kansas .
the city of atchison was an early commercial center in the state .
washburn university and washburn institute of technology are in topeka .
further westward along interstate 70 and the kansas river is junction city with its historic limestone and brick buildings and fort riley , well known as the home to the u . s . army 's 1st infantry division nicknamed " the big red one " buddhism .
kansas state university is in manhattan .
wichita is the largest city in the state .
it has a desire to become a cultural mecca in the midwest .
wichita was one of the first cities to add the city commissioner and city manager in their form of government .
it is the largest and longest wheat elevator in the world .
it is also the home of kansas cosmosphere and space center , prairie dunes country club and the kansas state fair .
north of wichita along interstate 135 is the city of newton .
it is midway between kansas city , topeka , and wichita .
southeast kansas has a unique history .
pittsburg is the biggest city in the region .
frontenac in 1888 was the site of the worst mine disaster in kansas .
fort scott has a national cemetery .
it is the site of his presidential library and the tombs of the former president , first lady and son who died in infancy .
westward along the interstate , the city of russell was the base of former u . s . state .
it is also the biggest city in the northwest .
the " cathedral of the plains " is 10 mi east of hays in victoria .
dodge city was famous for the cattle drives that started in the late 19th century .
liberal is along the southern santa fe trail route .
the bureau of economic analysis estimates that kansas 's total gross domestic product in 2014 was us $ billion .
the kansas department of labor gave the average annual wage to $ 42,930 in 2015 .
the main crop grown in kansas is wheat .
eastern kansas is part of the grain belt .
during 2016 , farmers of conventionally grown wheat farmed 8.2 million acres and harvested an average of 57 bushels of wheat per acre .
since oil prices bottomed in 1999 , oil production in kansas has remained fairly constant , with an average monthly rate of about 2.8 moilbbl in 2004 .
production has steadily decreased since the mid-1990s with the gradual depletion of the hugoton natural gas field – the state 's largest field which extends into oklahoma and texas .
in 2004 , slower declines in the hugoton gas fields and increased coalbed methane production made smaller overall decline .
the state 's economy is heavily influenced by the aerospace industry .
major companies headquartered in kansas include the sprint corporation enoch with world headquarters in overland parkdilly , yrc worldwide ɔ overland parkored overland parkliness , garminciful olathedilly , payless shoes waived , and kocharians with national headquarters in wichitapanpan .
embarq used to be the national headquarters in overland park before its acquisition by centurytel in 2009 .
the kansas air national guard has units at forbes field in topeka and the 184th intelligence wing in wichita .
the smoky hill weapons range is one of the largest and busiest bombing ranges in the nation .
revenue shortfalls result from lower than expected tax collections and slower growth in personal income after a 1998 permanent tax reduction have contributed to the substantial growth in the state 's debt level as bonded debt increased from $ 1.16 billion in 1998 to $ 3.83 billion in 2006 .
during the 2001 recession recession exceptionally , when monthly sales tax collections were flat , collections have trended higher as the economy has grown .
if there had been no change in sales tax rates or in the economy , the total sales tax collections for 2003 whould have been $ 1,797 million , compared to $ 805.3 million in 1990 .
the state sales tax is a combined destination-based tax .
kansas has 920 separate sales tax rates .
this taxing scheme was adopted on october 1,2005 .
all sales tax collected is remitted to the state department of revenue .
as a percentage of personal income , it was at 3.8 % .
however , lawmakers can vote to override the rule .
he was the democratic nominee for governor of kansas in the 2010 election .
starting in 2013 , the " ambitious tax overhaul " trimmed income tax , eliminated some corporate taxes , and created pass-through income tax exemptions , he raised the sales tax by one percent to offset the loss to state revenues but that was not good enough .
the tax reform encouraged tens of thousands of kansans to claim their wages and salaries as income from a business rather than from employment .
he argued that it was because of " low wheat and oil prices and a downturn in aircraft sales " .
in february 2017 , a bi-partisan coalition presented a bill that would repeal the pass-through income exemption , the " most important provisions of brownback 's overhaul " , and raise taxes to make up for the budget shortfall .
on june 6,2017 , a coalition of democrats and newly-elected republicans overrode brownback 's veto and implemented tax increases to a level that is close to what it was before 2013 .
brownback 's tax overhaul was described in june 2017 .
the very big tax cuts had " threatened the viability of schools and infrastructure " in kansas .
kansas also has the country 's third largest state highway system after texas and california .
by dialing 511 , callers will get access to information about road conditions , construction , closures , detours and weather conditions for the state highway system .
the state 's only major commercial carriers are wichita dwight d . eisenhower national airport .
most air travelers in northeastern kansas fly out of kansas city international airport .
it is the headquarters of " skydive kansas " , garden city regional airport , manhattan regional airport , and dodge city regional airport .
on january 31,2018 , governor jeff colyer took office .
elected in 2010 were the attorney general derek schmidt of independence ; the secretary of state kris kobach , of kansas city ; the state treasurer jacob laturner , of galena ; and the insurance commissioner ken selzer , of topeka .
the legislative branch is made up of the kansas house of representatives , with 125 members serving two-year terms , and the kansas senate , with 40 members serving four-year terms .
judicial branch : the judicial branch is headed by the kansas supreme court .
a vacancy is filled by the governor picking one of three nominees picked by the kansas supreme court nominating commission .
the board is made up of five kansas lawyers who are elected by other kansas lawyers .
since the middle of the 20th century , kansas has been socially conservative .
the 1990s brought the defeat of prominent democrats , including dan glickman , and the kansas state board of education 's 1999 decision to eliminate evolution from the state teaching standards , a decision that was later reversed .
kansas has a history of many firsts in legislative initiatives .
kansas also allowed women 's suffrage in 1912 .
many cities were being run by political machines or organized crime .
in 1954 , the supreme court of kansas ruled that kansas was at the center of " brown v . board of education of topeka " .
kansas also supported dewey in 1948 .
in 2008 , governor kathleen sebelius vetoed permits for the construction of new coal-fired energy plants in kansas .
therefore , reducing pollutants benefits our state not only in the short term -lrb- but also for generations of kansans to come -rrb- .
parkinson announced that he would allow building of a coal-fired plant .
he was elected governor in 2010 .
brownback has established himself as a conservative member of the u . s . senate in years prior , but since becoming governor has made several controversial decisions , leading to a 23 % approval rating among registered voters , the lowest of any governor in the united states .
in may 2011 , much to the opposition of art leaders and fans in the state , brownback removed the kansas arts commission .
in july 2011 , brownback announced that he would close the lawrence branch of the kansas department of social and rehabilitation services as a cost-saving measure .
later , lawrence city commission later voted to provide the money needed to keep the branch open .
the state 's current delegation to the congress of the united states includes republican senators pat roberts of dodge city and jerry moran of manhattan ; and republican representatives roger marshall of great bendbled district 1isk , steve watkinsylus of wichita avail district 2 wickets , ron estes of wichita [ district 4 temeraire district 3 goethes , and democratic representative sharice davidshahs district 3 goethes district .
this is when the republican party was created out of the movement against slavery into kansas territory .
kansas has not elected a democrat to the u . s . senate since 1932 .
this is the longest senate losing streak for either party in a single state .
brownback was not a candidate for re-election to a third full term in 2010 , but he was elected governor in that year 's general election .
moran won a landslide general election in november 2010 .
the only non-republican presidential candidates kansas has given its electoral vote to are populist james weaver and democrats woodrow wilson , franklin roosevelt roosevelt roosevelt roosevelt roosevelt roosevelt roosevelt roosevelt roosevelt roosevelt roosevelt roosevelt roosevelt roosevelt roosevelt roosevelt roosevelt roosevelt roosevelt roosevelt roosevelt innings , and lyndon johnson .
george w . bush won the state 's six electoral votes by a majority of 25 percentage points with 62 % of the vote .
the only two counties to support democrat john kerry in that election were wyandotte , which contains kansas city , and douglas , home to the university of kansas , located in lawrence .
the 2008 election brought similar results as john mccain won the state with 57 % of the votes .
douglas , wyandotte , and crawford county were the only counties in support of president barack obama .
abilene was the boyhood home to republican president dwight d . eisenhower .
a 10 % liquor drink tax is collected for liquor consumed on the licensed premises .
although the sale of cereal malt beverageellant also known as 3.2 beerraction was legalized in 1937 , the first post-prohibition legalization of alcoholic liquor was amended in 1948 .
the following year the legislature enacted the liquor control act .
as of november 2006 , kansas still has 29 dry counties and only 17 counties have passed liquor-by-the-drink with no food sales requirement .
education in kansas is controlled at the primary and secondary school level by the kansas state department of education .
the board of education has approved changes in the state science curriculum standards that encouraged the teaching of intelligent design .
both times , the standards were changed after changes in the composition of the board in the next election .
many of the band 's members are from there .
danny carey was the drummer for tool .
the first album was titled " kansas city native janelle monae " , and the liberal native of kansas city , were in the state of florida .
the state anthem is the american classic home on the range .
the kansas march of 1935 is called " the kansas march " .
the state 's most famous appearance in literature was as the home of dorothy gale , the main character in the novel " the wonderful wizard of oz " exposition 1900 fiba 1900 nationals .
kansas was also the setting of the 1965 best-seller " in cold blood " .
mixing fact and fiction , the book talks about the events and aftermath of the 1959 murder of a rich farmer and his family who lived in the small west kansas town of holcomb in finney county .
the story is about a young and adventurous girl named abilene who is sent to the fictional town of manifest , kansas by her father in the summer of 1936 .
lawrence is the setting for a number of science fiction writer james gunn 's novels .
the first movie theater in kansas was the patee theater in lawrence .
most theaters at the time only showed movies as part of vaudeville acts but not as an exclusive and stand-alone form of entertainment .
though the patee family had been involved in vaudeville , they believed movies could carry the evening without other variety acts , but in order to show the movies it was necessary for the patee 's to establish a generating plantloid back in 1903 lawrence was not yet electrified .
kansas has been the setting of many award-winning and popular american movies .
it is listed by the guinness book of world records as the oldest operating movie theater in the world .
in 1926 , the jayhawk theatre opened its doors for the first time to movie going audiences .
the fox theater in hutchinson was built in 1930 .
sporting kansas city , who play their home games at village west in kansas city , since 2008 , are the first top-tier professional sports league and first major league soccer team to be located within kansas .
in 2011 the team moved to their new home , a $ 165m soccer stadium .
they play in the major league sports teams of kansas city , missouri .
the chiefs and the royals play at the truman sports complex .
fc kansas city , a charter member of the national women 's soccer league , played the 2013 season .
the denver broncos of the nfl play their sports teams .
the sports car club of america has its national headquarters in topeka .
the history of professional sports in kansas was from the beginning of the minor league baseball topeka capitals and leavenworth soldiers in 1886 in the western league .
one year before the " color line " started playing professional baseball .
in 1887 , the western league was dominated by a reorganized topeka team called the golden giants .
the golden giants won an exhibition game from the defending world series champions , the st . louis browns francais the present-day cardinalsroids by a score of 12 – 9 .
topeka was unable to support the team , and it ended after one year .
the first night game in the history of professional baseball was played in independence on april 28,1930 .
the independence team won with a score of 9 to 1 before a crowd of 1,700 spectators .
the governing body for intercollegiate sports in the united states was in 1952 .
many kansans are fans of the state 's major college sports teams .
they have 16 varsity teams and they compete in the big 12 conference .
the helms foundation was awarded for 1922 and 1923 .
the wildcats returned to the ncaa tournament in 2008 .
however , success on the gridiron has been less frequent for both ksu and ku .
the team won the orange bowl in 2008 .
bill snyder arrived to coach at k-state in 1989 .
after three seasons in which k-state football languished , snyder came out of retirement in 2009 and guided them to the top of the college football ranks again , finishing second in the big 12 in 2011 and earning a berth in the cotton bowl , and winning the big 12 again in 2012 .
wichita state university is best known for its baseball and basketball programs .
psu passed hillsdale college at the top of the all-time victories list in the 1995 season on its march to the national runner-up finish .
the kansas collegiate athletic conference has its roots as one of the oldest college sports conferences in existence .
emporia state 's women 's basketball team , under head coach brandon schneider , who is now the women 's basketball coach at the university of kansas , has seen success as well .
emporia state and washburn in topeka share a heated rivalry in all sports .
