a space observatory is a telescope in outer space to see distant objects , galaxies and other astronomical objects .
space telescopes avoid the filtering of ultraviolet frequencies , x-rays and gamma rays .
the first operational space telescopes were the american orbiting astronomical observatory oao-2 launched in 1968 and the soviet orion 1 ultraviolet telescope aboard space station salyut 1 in 1971 .
other imaging satellites pointed toward earth for purposes of espionage , weather analysis and other types of information gathering .
space observatories are divided into two types : those which map the entire skyference surveys lille , and those which focus on selected astronomical objects or parts of the sky and beyond .
wilhelm beer and johann heinrich madler discussed the advantages of an observatory on the moon .
in 1946 , american theoretical astrophysicist lyman spitzer proposed a telescope in space , 11 years before the soviet union launched the first satellite , " sputnik 1 " .
spitzer 's proposal was to design a large telescope that would not be hindered by earth 's atmosphere .
spitzer 's vision ultimately ultimatelypired into the hubble space telescope , which was launched on april 24,1990 by the space shuttle " discovery " astronauts .
performing astronomy from ground-based observatories on earth is limited by the filtering and distortion of electromagnetic radiation induced by the atmosphere .
some terrestrial telescopes can reduce atmospheric effects with adaptive optics .
a telescope orbiting earth outside the atmosphere is not subject to twinkling nor to light pollution from artificial light sources on earth .
as a result , the angular resolution of space telescopes is much smaller than a ground-based telescope with a similar aperture .
space-based astronomy is vital for frequency ranges outside the optical windows and the radio window .
for example , x-ray astronomy is nearly impossible when done from earth .
this is also blocked by infrared and ultraviolet .
space telescopes are much more expensive than ground-based telescopes .
because of this , space telescopes are also very difficult to keep .
the hubble space telescope was serviced by the space shuttle .
the satellites have been launched and operated by nasa , isro , esa , japanese space agency and the soviet space program later replaced by roskosmos of russia .
as of 2018 , many space observatories have already completed their missions , while others continue operating on extended time .
however , the availability of space telescopes and observatories in the future is threatened due to delays and budget cuts .
while future space observatories are planned by nasa , jaxa and the china national space administration , scientists fear that there would be gaps in coverage that would not be covered immediately by future projects and this would affect research in fundamental science .
