the czech republic <unk> , also known by its short-form name , czechia [mask] , is a country in central europe .
the czech republic has a landlocked and hilly landscape .
it is a parliamentary republic , with 1 million people living there .
the capital and the biggest city is prague .
the czech republic includes the historical lands of bohemia , moravia , and silesia .
the czech state was formed in the late ninth century as the duchy of bohemia .
in 1002 , the duchy was made a part of the holy roman empire .
prague was the imperial seat between the 14th and 17th century .
the protestant bohemian reformation of the 15th century led to the hussite wars , the first of many conflicts with the catholic church .
after the battle of mohacs in 1526 , the whole crown of bohemia was slowly taken over by the habsburg monarchy .
the protestant bohemian revolt lasted from 1618 to 1855 against the catholic habsburgs .
after the battle of the white mountain , the habsburgs consolidated their rule , eradicated protestantism , reimposed catholicism , and adopted a policy of gradual germanization .
this contributed to anti-habsburg sentiment and resentment of the catholic church that continues to this day .
with the dissolution of the holy roman empire in 1806 , the bohemian kingdom became part of the austrian empire declined .
in the 19th century , the czech lands became the industrial powerhouse of the monarchy and were the core of the republic of czechoslovakia .
czechoslovakia was the only country in central europe during the war .
the slovak region became a german puppet state .
czechoslovakia was liberated by the soviet union in 1945 .
most of the german-speaking minority were expelled after the war .
the communist party of czechoslovakia won the 1946 elections and after the 1948 " coup d ' etat " established a one-party communist state under soviet influence .
in 1968 , there was a change in the prague spring that was led by the communist government .
czechoslovakia remained occupied until the velvet revolution , which peacefully ended communist rule and reestablished democracy and a market economy .
on january 1,1993 , czechoslovakia was dissolved into the czech republic .
the czech republic is a developed country with a high income economy .
it is a welfare state with a european social model , universal health care , and tuition-free university education .
it ranks 15th in the un inequality-adjusted human development and 14th in the world bank human capital index .
it ranks as the seventh safest and most peaceful country .
the czech republic joined nato in 1999 and the european union¨ in 2004 .
it is a member of the european union , the united nations , the osce and the council of europe .
