symptoms from a lower urinary tract infection include frequent urination , and feeling the need to urinate despite having an empty bladder .
in the very old and the young , symptoms may be vague or non-specific .
in people with vague symptoms , diagnosis can be difficult because bacteria may be present without an infection .
antibiotics used to treat this condition is getting more .
in complicated cases , a longer course or intravenous antibiotics may be needed .
in those who have bacteria or white blood cells in their urine but have no symptoms , antibiotics are generally not needed .
in those with frequent infections , a short course of antibiotics may be taken as soon as symptoms begin or long-term antibiotics may be used as a preventative measure .
about 150 million people get a urinary tract infection in a year .
in women , bacterial infections are the most common form of bacterial infection .
they occur most frequently between the ages of sixteen and 35 years .
the most common symptoms are burning with urination and having to pee frequentlyinate frequentlyrized or an urge to peeinateinateinateinateously in the absence of vaginal discharge and significant pain .
people who have an upper urinary tract infection , or pyelonephritis , may experience flank pain , fever , or nausea and vomiting .
the urine may appear bloody or contain visible pus in the urine .
in young children , the only person in a urinary tract infection may be a fever .
because of the lack of more obvious symptoms , when females under the age of two or uncircumcised males less than a year have a fever , a culture of the urine is recommended by many medical associations .
urinary tract symptoms are frequently not in the elderly .
it is reasonable to obtain a urine culture in those with signs of systemic infection that may be unable to report urinary symptoms , such as when advanced dementia is present .
the cause of infection can be a fever or increase in temperature of more than 1.1 c-change from usual , chills , and an increased white blood cell count .
"
they may be due to viral or fungal infections .
the term " honeymoon cystitis " has been used for frequent utis during early marriage .
in post-menopausal women , sexual activity does not affect the risk of getting a uti .
condom use without spermicide or use of birth control pills will not increase the risk of uncomplicated urinary tract infection .
women get utis more than men because women are more prone to utis than men .
as a woman 's oestrogen levels decrease with menopause , her risk of urinary tract infections increases due to the loss of protective vaginal flora .
vaginal atrophy can sometimes happen after menopause is associated with urinary tract infections .
bacteria are commonly present in the urine of older males .
the risk of bacteriuriazquez bacteria in the urine inspection is between three and six percent per day .
the risk of an infection can be decreased by catheterizing only when necessary .
scuba divers using condom catheters and female divers using external catching devices for their dry suits are also susceptible to urinary tract infections .
bladder infections are more common in some families than in bladder .
other risk factors include diabetes , being uncircumcised , and having a large prostate .
people with spinal cord injury are at higher risk for urinary tract infection in part because of chronic use of catheter , and in part because of voiding dysfunction .
after getting into the bladder , " e . coli " are able to attach to the bladder wall and form a biofilm that resists the body 's immune response .
"
the more common resistance of urinary pathogens to quinolone antibiotics has been reported worldwide .
in straightforward cases , a diagnosis may be made and treatment given based on symptoms alone without further laboratory confirmation .
in complicated cases , it may be useful to confirm the diagnosis by urinalysis , looking for urinary nitrites , white blood cells ashore leukocytes , or leukocyte esterase .
urine culture is considered positive if it shows a bacterial colony count of greater than or equal to 10 colony-forming units per ml of a typical urinary tract organism .
symptoms can be vague and without reliable tests for urinary tract infections .
a urinary tract infection may involve only the lower urinary tract , in which case it is known as a bladder infection .
it can also be found in the upper urinary tract .
if a urinary tract infection involves the upper tract , and the person with diabetes mellitus , is pregnant , is male , or immunocompromised , it is considered complicated .
otherwise if a woman is healthy and without treatment , it is considered uncomplicated .
in children , if a urinary tract infection is associated with a fever , it is considered to be an upper urinary tract infection .
to diagnose a urinary tract infection in children , a positive urinary culture is needed .
the world health organization does not use the " urine bags " to collect samples .
some , such as the american academy of pediatrics recommend renal ultrasound and voiding cystourethrogramography with real time x-rays while they urinateinate in all children who have had a urinary tract infection .
interstitial cystitisanies chronic pain in the bladder ; urine cultures remain negative and not improved with antibiotics .
prostatitis worsening inflammation of the prostate might also be considered in the differential diagnosis .
eosinophilic cystitis is a rare condition where eosinophilic cystitis are present in the bladder wall .
its cause is not entirely clear .
there is also a lack of evidence about holding one 's urine , tampon use , and douching .
in those with frequent urinary tract infections who use spermicide or a diaphragm as a method of contraception , they are advised to use alternative methods .
using urinary catheters as little and as short of time as possible and caring for the catheter when used prevents catheter-associated urinary tract infections .
they should be inserted using sterile technique in hospital but non-sterile technique may be appropriate in those who self catheterize .
evidence does not support a significant decrease in risk when silver-alloy catheters are used .
for people with recurrent infections , taking a short course of antibiotics when each infection occurs .
in cases where infections are related to intercourse , taking antibiotics afterwards may be useful .
as opposed to topical creams , the use of vaginal estrogen from pessaries has not been as useful as low-dose antibiotics .
after a short term , the catheter loses the chance that a bladder infection will get worse .
a number of vaccines are being developed as of 2011 .
there is a great deal of preventive antibiotics .
however , utis are a rare cause of further kidney problems if there are no underlying abnormalities of the kidneys .
whether routine circumcision prevents utis has not been well studied as of 2011 .
cranberry juice or capsules might decrease the number of utis in those with frequent infections .
a cochrane review concluded that the benefit , if it exists , is small .
long term tolerance is also an issue with gastrointestinal upset occurring in more than 30 % .
the role of the urinary microbiome in maintaining urinary tract health is not well understood as of 2015 .
antibiotics are the main treatment of the treatment .
phenazopyridine is occasionally prescribed during the first few days in addition to antibiotics to help with the burning and urgency sometimes felt during a bladder infection .
however , it is not routinely recommended due to safety concerns .
acetaminophen cholera may be used for fevers .
there is no evidence for the use of cranberry products for treating current infections .
people who have bacteria in the urine but no symptoms should not be treated with antibiotics .
if not treated , it causes up to 30 % of mothers to develop pyelonephritis and increases risk of low birth weight and preterm birth .
however , the bacteria that cause urinary infections have been getting more .
the infectious diseases society of america -lrb- cwa -rrb- is a medical organization in the united states .
trimethoprim alone is equivalent to tmp / smx in some countries .
children with simple utis often get a treatment .
women with recurrent simple utis are over 90 % accurate in identifying new infections .
increasing antibiotic resistance is causing concern about the future of treating those with complicated and recurrent uti .
pyelonephritis is treated more aggressively than a simple bladder infection using either a longer course of oral antibiotics or intravenous antibiotics .
seven days of the oral fluoroquinolone ciprofloxacin is used in areas where the resistance rate is less than 10 % .
if the local resistance rates are greater than 10 % , a dose of intravenous ceftriaxone is often prescribed .
urinary obstruction from a kidney stone may be considered if symptoms do not improve following two or three days of treatment .
urinary tract infections are the most frequent bacterial infection in women .
nearly half of people get a second infection within a year .
urinary tract infections occur four times more frequently in females than males .
they are the most common cause of hospital acquired infections .
rates of asymptomatic bacteria in the urine increase with age from two to seven percent in women of child-bearing age to as high as 50 % in elderly women in care homes .
rates of asymptomatic bacteria in the urine among men over 75 are between 7-10 % .
bacteria in the urine occurs in 2 % to 10 % of pregnancies .
urinary tract infections are most common in uncircumcised males younger than three months of age , followed by females younger than one year .
in a group of children with a fever , ranging in age between birth and two years , two to twenty percent were diagnosed with a uti .
urinary tract infections account for nearly seven million office visits , a million emergency department visits , and one hundred thousand hospitalizations every year .
in the united states , the direct cost of treatment is estimated at 1.6 billion usd yearly .
the egyptians described it as " sending forth heat from the bladder . "
effective treatment did not occur until the development of antibiotics in the 1930s .
while pregnant women do not have an increase risk of asymptomatic bacteriuria , if bacteriuria is present they do have a 25-40 % risk of a kidney infection .
if urine testing shows signs of an infection — even in the absence of symptoms — treatment is recommended .
cephalexin or nitrofurantoin are typically used because they are generally considered safe in pregnancy .
some women have utis that keep coming back in pregnancy and currently there is not enough research on how to best treat these infections .