a urinary tract infection uti ¥omist is an infection that affects part of the urinary tract .
when it affects the lower urinary tract , it is known as a bladder infection infection infection infection infection infection infection infection infection infection cystitisrford .
symptoms from a lower urinary tract infection include frequent urination , and feeling the need to urinate despite having an empty bladder .
symptoms of a kidney infection include fever and back pain .
rarely the urine may appear bloody .
in the very old and the young , symptoms may be vague or non-specific .
the most common cause of infection is " escherichia coli " .
risk factors include sexual intercourse , sexual intercourse , and family history .
although sexual intercourse is a risk factor , utis are not classified as sexually transmitted infections infections infections infections infections infections infections infections infections infections infections infections infections infections infections infections infections infections infections infections at the same time .
if it happens , it usually follows a bladder infection .
diagnosis in young healthy women can be based on symptoms alone .
in people with vague symptoms , diagnosis can be difficult because bacteria may be present without an infection .
in complicated cases , a urine culture may be useful .
utis are treated with a short course of antibiotics .
antibiotics used to treat this condition is getting more .
in complicated cases , a longer course or intravenous antibiotics may be needed .
if symptoms do not improve in two or three days , more tests may be needed .
phenazopyridine may help with dengue fever .
in those who have bacteria or white blood cells in their urine but have no symptoms , antibiotics are generally not needed .
in those with frequent infections , a short course of antibiotics may be taken as soon as symptoms begin or long-term antibiotics may be used as a preventative measure .
about 150 million people get a urinary tract infection in a year .
they are more common in women than men .
in women , bacterial infections are the most common form of bacterial infection .
half of women have an infection at some point in their lives .
they occur most frequently between the ages of sixteen and 35 years .
urinary tract infections have been described since ancient times .
lower urinary tract infection is also known as a bladder infection .
the most common symptoms are burning with urination and having to pee frequentlyinate frequentlyrized or an urge to peeinateinateinateinateously in the absence of vaginal discharge and significant pain .
these symptoms can vary from mild to severe .
some pain above the pubic bone or in the lower back may be present .
people who have an upper urinary tract infection , or pyelonephritis , may experience flank pain , fever , or nausea and vomiting .
the urine may appear bloody or contain visible pus in the urine .
in young children , the only person in a urinary tract infection may be a fever .
because of the lack of more obvious symptoms , when females under the age of two or uncircumcised males less than a year have a fever , a culture of the urine is recommended by many medical associations .
infants may feed poorly , vomit , sleep more , or show signs of jaundice .
in older children , new onset urinary incontinencette loss of bladder control pursuant to a urinary tract infection may occur .
urinary tract symptoms are frequently not in the elderly .
some people have a health care provider with sepsis , an infection of the blood , as the first symptoms .
diagnosis can be a problem with many old people .
it is reasonable to obtain a urine culture in those with signs of systemic infection that may be unable to report urinary symptoms , such as when advanced dementia is present .
the cause of infection can be a fever or increase in temperature of more than 1.1 c-change from usual , chills , and an increased white blood cell count .
" e . coli " from the gut is the cause of 80 – 85 % of urinary tract infections .
they may be due to viral or fungal infections .
healthcare-associated urinary tract infections are related to urinary tract infections , including " e . coli " — 27 % — 11 % naples , " pseudomonas " albicans " — 11 % ; and the fungal pathogen " candidaococcus " enterococcus " .
urinary tract infections due to " staphylococcus aureus " usually occur secondary to blood-borne infections .
" c . trachomatis " and " mycoplasma genitalium " can infect the bladder .
urinary tract infections are usually classified as a urethritis rather than urinary tract infection .
in young sexually active women , sexual activity is the cause of 75 – 90 % of bladder infections .
the term " honeymoon cystitis " has been used for frequent utis during early marriage .
in post-menopausal women , sexual activity does not affect the risk of getting a uti .
if the spermicide is used , it increases the risk of utis .
diaphragm can be used in people with diaphragm .
condom use without spermicide or use of birth control pills will not increase the risk of uncomplicated urinary tract infection .
women get utis more than men because women are more prone to utis than men .
as a woman 's oestrogen levels decrease with menopause , her risk of urinary tract infections increases due to the loss of protective vaginal flora .
vaginal atrophy can sometimes happen after menopause is associated with urinary tract infections .
chronic prostatitis in the forms of chronic prostatitis / chronic pelvic pain syndrome and chronic bacterial prostatitis may cause urinary tract infections in males .
males and females can get bigger as males get older .
bacteria are commonly present in the urine of older males .
catheterization increases the risk for urinary tract infections .
the risk of bacteriuriazquez bacteria in the urine inspection is between three and six percent per day .
the risk of an infection can be decreased by catheterizing only when necessary .
scuba divers using condom catheters and female divers using external catching devices for their dry suits are also susceptible to urinary tract infections .
bladder infections are more common in some families than in bladder .
this is believed to be related to genetics .
other risk factors include diabetes , being uncircumcised , and having a large prostate .
utis are associated with vesicoureteral reflux klans .
people with spinal cord injury are at higher risk for urinary tract infection in part because of chronic use of catheter , and in part because of voiding dysfunction .
it is the most common cause of infection in the population .
cranberry juice or cranberry supplement may not be treated in prevention and treatment in this population .
the bacteria that cause urinary tract infections usually enter the bladder through the urethra .
however , infection may also occur through the blood or lymph .
it is believed that the bacteria are usually transmitted to the urethra from the bowel , with females at greater risk due to their anatomy .
after getting into the bladder , " e . coli " are able to attach to the bladder wall and form a biofilm that resists the body 's immune response .
" escherichia coli " is the single most common microorganism , followed by " klebsiella " and " proteus " spp . , to cause urinary tract infection .
" klebsiella " and " proteus " spp . , are frequently associated with stone disease .
gram-positive bacteria such as " enterococcus " and " staphylococcus " increased .
the more common resistance of urinary pathogens to quinolone antibiotics has been reported worldwide .
in straightforward cases , a diagnosis may be made and treatment given based on symptoms alone without further laboratory confirmation .
in complicated cases , it may be useful to confirm the diagnosis by urinalysis , looking for urinary nitrites , white blood cells ashore leukocytes , or leukocyte esterase .
another test , urine microscopy , looks for red blood cells , white blood cells , or bacteria .
urine culture is considered positive if it shows a bacterial colony count of greater than or equal to 10 colony-forming units per ml of a typical urinary tract organism .
cultures can also test antibiotic will with these cultures .
however , women with negative cultures may still improve with treatment .
symptoms can be vague and without reliable tests for urinary tract infections .
a urinary tract infection may involve only the lower urinary tract , in which case it is known as a bladder infection .
it can also be found in the upper urinary tract .
if the urine contains significant bacteria , the condition is known asymptomatic bacteriuria .
if a urinary tract infection involves the upper tract , and the person with diabetes mellitus , is pregnant , is male , or immunocompromised , it is considered complicated .
otherwise if a woman is healthy and without treatment , it is considered uncomplicated .
in children , if a urinary tract infection is associated with a fever , it is considered to be an upper urinary tract infection .
to diagnose a urinary tract infection in children , a positive urinary culture is needed .
contamination poses a frequent challenge depending on the method of collection used .
the world health organization does not use the " urine bags " to collect samples .
some , such as the american academy of pediatrics recommend renal ultrasound and voiding cystourethrogramography with real time x-rays while they urinateinate in all children who have had a urinary tract infection .
there is a lack of effective treatment if problems are found .
in women with cervicitisitistage inflammation of the cervixorus or vaginitisitisitisitisitis inflammation of the vaginaginaginaginaginaginaginaginaginaginaginaginaginaginaginaginagina discharge and in young men with uti symptoms , a " chlamydia trachomatis " or " neisseria gonorrhoeae " infection may be the cause .
urethritis is a urethritis rather than a urinary tract infection .
vaginitis may also be caused by yeast infection .
interstitial cystitisanies chronic pain in the bladder ; urine cultures remain negative and not improved with antibiotics .
prostatitis worsening inflammation of the prostate might also be considered in the differential diagnosis .
hemorrhagic cystitis , characterized by blood in the urine , can occur secondary to a number of causes .
medications that cause this problem are the chemotherapeutic agent cyclophosphamide , with rates of 2 to 40 % .
eosinophilic cystitis is a rare condition where eosinophilic cystitis are present in the bladder wall .
signs and symptoms are similar to a bladder infection .
its cause is not entirely clear .
a number of measures have not been confirmed to affect uti frequency .
there is also a lack of evidence about holding one 's urine , tampon use , and douching .
in those with frequent urinary tract infections who use spermicide or a diaphragm as a method of contraception , they are advised to use alternative methods .
in those with benign prostatic hyperplasia urinating in a sitting position appears to improve bladder emptying .
using urinary catheters as little and as short of time as possible and caring for the catheter when used prevents catheter-associated urinary tract infections .
they should be inserted using sterile technique in hospital but non-sterile technique may be appropriate in those who self catheterize .
the urinary catheter set up should also be kept sealed .
evidence does not support a significant decrease in risk when silver-alloy catheters are used .
for people with recurrent infections , taking a short course of antibiotics when each infection occurs .
a longer course of daily antibiotics is also effective .
medications frequently used include nitrofurantoin and trimethoprim / sulfamethoxazoleference tmp / smxboroughins .
methenamine is another substance used as in the bladder .
there are concerns of antibiotics .
in cases where infections are related to intercourse , taking antibiotics afterwards may be useful .
in post-menopausal women , topical vaginal estrogen has been found to reduce the amount of time getting getting getting pregnant .
as opposed to topical creams , the use of vaginal estrogen from pessaries has not been as useful as low-dose antibiotics .
after a short term , the catheter loses the chance that a bladder infection will get worse .
a number of vaccines are being developed as of 2011 .
there is a great deal of preventive antibiotics .
however , utis are a rare cause of further kidney problems if there are no underlying abnormalities of the kidneys .
whether routine circumcision prevents utis has not been well studied as of 2011 .
cranberry juice or capsules might decrease the number of utis in those with frequent infections .
a cochrane review concluded that the benefit , if it exists , is small .
long term tolerance is also an issue with gastrointestinal upset occurring in more than 30 % .
cranberry juice is not recommended for this indication .
as of 2015 , probiotics require further study to determine if they are good .
the role of the urinary microbiome in maintaining urinary tract health is not well understood as of 2015 .
antibiotics are the main treatment of the treatment .
phenazopyridine is occasionally prescribed during the first few days in addition to antibiotics to help with the burning and urgency sometimes felt during a bladder infection .
however , it is not routinely recommended due to safety concerns .
acetaminophen cholera may be used for fevers .
there is no evidence for the use of cranberry products for treating current infections .
people who have bacteria in the urine but no symptoms should not be treated with antibiotics .
people who have spinal cord injuries , and those who have urinary catheters are catheters .
pregnancy is an exception and it is recommended that women take 7 days of antibiotics .
if not treated , it causes up to 30 % of mothers to develop pyelonephritis and increases risk of low birth weight and preterm birth .
some support treatment of people with diabetes mellitus .
uncomplicated infections can be diagnosed and treated based on symptoms alone .
antibiotics taken by mouth such as trimethoprim / sulfamethoxazolecision tmp / smx× , nitrofurantoin , or fosfomycin are typically first line .
cephalosporins , amoxicillin , clavulanic acid , or a fluoroquinolone may be used .
however , the bacteria that cause urinary infections have been getting more .
the food and drug administration recommend fda faso faso faso faso faso faso should suggest against the use of fluoroquinolones when other options are available due to higher risks of serious side effects .
these drugs substantially shorten the time to recover .
a three-day treatment with trimethoprim , tmp / smx , or a fluoroquinolone is usually enough .
fosfomycin may be used as a single dose but has been associated with lower rates of efficacy .
with treatment , symptoms should improve within 36 hours .
about 50 % of people will get better without treatment within a few days or weeks .
fluoroquinolones are not treatment .
the infectious diseases society of america -lrb- cwa -rrb- is a medical organization in the united states .
amoxicillin-clavulanate is less effective than other options .
despite this precaution , some resistance has developed to all of these drugs because of their widespread use .
trimethoprim alone is equivalent to tmp / smx in some countries .
children with simple utis often get a treatment .
women with recurrent simple utis are over 90 % accurate in identifying new infections .
they benefit from self-treatment after the first treatment fails .
complicated utis are more difficult to treat .
it may require identifying and addressing the underlying complication .
increasing antibiotic resistance is causing concern about the future of treating those with complicated and recurrent uti .
pyelonephritis is treated more aggressively than a simple bladder infection using either a longer course of oral antibiotics or intravenous antibiotics .
seven days of the oral fluoroquinolone ciprofloxacin is used in areas where the resistance rate is less than 10 % .
if the local resistance rates are greater than 10 % , a dose of intravenous ceftriaxone is often prescribed .
trimethoprim / sulfamethoxazole or amoxicillin / clavulanate orally for 14 days is another option .
people who have more severe symptoms are sometimes admitted to a hospital for ongoing antibiotics .
urinary obstruction from a kidney stone may be considered if symptoms do not improve following two or three days of treatment .
urinary tract infections are the most frequent bacterial infection in women .
10 % of women get an infection yearly .
nearly half of people get a second infection within a year .
urinary tract infections occur four times more frequently in females than males .
pyelonephritis happens between 20 and 30 times less frequently .
they are the most common cause of hospital acquired infections .
rates of asymptomatic bacteria in the urine increase with age from two to seven percent in women of child-bearing age to as high as 50 % in elderly women in care homes .
rates of asymptomatic bacteria in the urine among men over 75 are between 7-10 % .
bacteria in the urine occurs in 2 % to 10 % of pregnancies .
urinary tract infections can affect 10 % of people during childhood .
urinary tract infections are most common in uncircumcised males younger than three months of age , followed by females younger than one year .
there are many different rates of children .
in a group of children with a fever , ranging in age between birth and two years , two to twenty percent were diagnosed with a uti .
urinary tract infections account for nearly seven million office visits , a million emergency department visits , and one hundred thousand hospitalizations every year .
the cost of these infections is very high .
in the united states , the direct cost of treatment is estimated at 1.6 billion usd yearly .
urinary tract infections have been described since ancient times .
the egyptians described it as " sending forth heat from the bladder . "
effective treatment did not occur until the development of antibiotics in the 1930s .
urinary tract infections are more concerning in pregnancy due to the increased risk of kidney infections .
during pregnancy , high progesterone levels elevate the risk of decreased muscle tone of the ureters and bladder .
while pregnant women do not have an increase risk of asymptomatic bacteriuria , if bacteriuria is present they do have a 25-40 % risk of a kidney infection .
if urine testing shows signs of an infection — even in the absence of symptoms — treatment is recommended .
cephalexin or nitrofurantoin are typically used because they are generally considered safe in pregnancy .
a kidney infection during pregnancy may result in premature birth or pre-eclampsia .
some women have utis that keep coming back in pregnancy and currently there is not enough research on how to best treat these infections .
