a valley is a low area between two or more mountains .
a valley is a large area of rock that is longer than it is wide .
the terms u-shaped and v-shaped are descriptive terms of geography to show the shape of valleys .
most valleys belong to one of these two main types or a mix of them , at least with respect to the cross section of the slopes or hillsides .
a valley in its broadest geographic sense is also known as a dale .
similar geological structures , such as canyons , ravines , gorges , gullies , chines and kloofs , are not usually referred to as valleys .
a valley formed by flowing water , called " fluvial valley " or " river valley " , is usually v-shaped .
the exact shape will depend on the characteristics of the stream flowing through it .
rivers with steep gradients , as in mountain ranges , make steep walls and a bottom .
shallower slopes may make broader and gentler valleys .
however , in the lowest stretch of a river , where it approaches its base level , it begins to deposit sediment and the valley bottom becomes a floodplain .
some of the first human complex societies originated in river valleys .
in prehistory , the rivers were used as a source of fresh water and food tossing fish and gamemite , as well as a place to wash and a sewer .
this created the development of agriculture .
the first civilizations were made from these communities .
a vale is a wide valley with wide flood plain or flat valley bottom .
in southern england vales occur between the escarpment slopes of pairs of chalk formations , where the chalk dome has been eroded , exposing less resistant underlying rock , usually claystone .
rift valleys , such as the albertine rift and gregory rift are formed by the expansion of the earth 's crust .
there are many forms of valley associated with glaciation that may be referred to as glacial valleys .
a valley carved by glaciers is usually u-shaped and resembles a trough .
this trough valley becomes visible upon the recession of the glacier that forms it .
when the ice recedes or thaws , the valley remains , often littered with small boulders that were transported within the ice .
floor gradient does not affect the valley 's shape , it is the glacier 's size that does .
continuously flowing glaciers , especially in the ice age , and large-sized glaciers carve wide , deep valleys , sometimes with valley steps that reflect different erosion rates .
u-shaped valleys are found in every mountainous region that has experienced glaciation , usually during the pleistocene ice ages .
most present u-shaped valleys started as v-shaped before glaciation .
the glaciers carved it out wider and deeper , and changing the shape .
this proceeds through the glacial erosion processes of glaciation and abrasion .
a material called boulder clay is deposited on the floor of the valley .
as the ice melts and retreats , the valley is left with very steep sides and a flat floor .
a river may remain in the valley .
this replaces the original stream or river and is known as a misfit stream because it is smaller than one would expect given the size of its valley .
a tunnel valley is a large , long , u-shaped valley originally cut under the ice near the margin of continental ice sheets .
a tunnel valley can be up to 100 km , 4 km wide , and 400 m depth may vary along its length streams .
tunnel valleys were formed by erosion by water .
they carry large volumes of melt water .
their flat bottoms are typical of subglacial glacial erosion .
in northern europe , the scandinavian ice sheet during the various ice ages advanced slightly uphill against the lie of the land .
as a result , its meltwaters flowed parallel to the ice margin to reach the north sea basin , forming huge , flat valleys known as " urstromtaler " .
unlike the other forms of glacial valley , these were formed by glacial meltwaters .
depending on the topography , the rock types and the climate , a lot of transitional forms between v-, u-and plain valleys exist .
their bottoms can be broad or narrow .
the broader a mountain valley , the lower its shoulders are in most cases .
an exception are canyons where the shoulder almost is near the top of the valley 's slope .
in the alps the tyrolean inn valley – the shoulders are quite lowloid 100 – 200 meters above the bottomosome .
many villages are here cupping esp .
even in winter when the valley 's floor is completely filled with fog , these villages are in sunshine .
in some stress-tectonic regions of the rockies or the alps fragments the side valleys are parallel to each other , and also they are hanging .
the brooks flow into the river in the form of deep canyons or waterfalls .
usually this is the result of a violent erosion of the former valley shoulders , a special genesis found also at aretes and glacial cirques , at every scottish glen , or in a northern fjord .
a hanging valley is a tributary of the main valley .
they are most commonly associated with u-shaped valleys when a glacier flows into a glacier of larger volume .
the main glacier erodes a deep u-shaped valley with nearly vertical sides .
the shallower valley is now hanging above the main valley .
waterfalls are usually at the water at the waterfalls .
hanging valleys also occur in fjords under water .
the branches of sognefjord are for instance much shallower than the main fjord .
the mouth of fjærlandsfjord is about 400 meters deep .
the mouth of ikjefjord is only 50 meters deep .
there is a big area of snow that is not the only place where hanging streams and valleys are made .
hanging valleys are also the result of varying rates of erosion of the main valley and the tributary valleys .
the different rates of erosion are associated with the composition of the adjacent rocks in the different valley locations .
the valleys are eroded and deepened by glaciers or erosion at a slower rate than that of the main valley floor .
the tributary valley of more resistant rock then hangs over the main valley .
trough-shaped valleys also form in areas of heavy denudation .
by contrast , with glacial u-shaped valleys , there is less downward and sideways erosion .
the severe slope denudation results in gently sloping valley sides and their transition to the actual valley bottom is unclear .
trough-shaped valleys occur mainly in periglacial regions and in tropical regions of variable wetness .
both climates are dominated by heavy denudation .
box valleys have wide , relatively level floors and steep sides .
they occur in mid-latitudes , but also occur in tropical and dry regions .
usually the bottom of a main valley is broad – independent of the u or v shape .
it is usually filled with mountain sediments .
the shape of the floor can be rather horizontal , similar to a flat cylinder , or terraced .
side valleys are rather v than u-shaped .
the location of the villages depends on the across-valley profile , on climate and local traditions , and on the danger of avalanches or landslides .
most are places on terraces or alluvial fans if they live .
historic siting of villages within the mainstem valleys , however , have chiefly considered the potential of flooding .
a hollow is a small valley where a stream is dry .
this term is often used in new england , appalachia , and the ozarks of arkansas and missouri to describe such geographic features .
in rural areas in america , it may be pronounced as " holler " .
appalacian story tellers say that a holler is an area where a person has to hollerfully yellizes to communicate with their nearest neighbor .
