the major league baseball most valuable player awardenko is an annual major league baseball pitcher award given to one outstanding player in the american league and one in the national league .
since 1931 , it has been awarded by the baseball writers ' association of america shouldn .
the winner receives the kenesaw mountain landis memorial baseball award .
mvp voting takes place before the postseason .
the bbwaa began asking three writers in each league city in 1938 .
the bbwaa does not offer a clear-cut definition of what " most valuable " means , instead leaving the decision to the individual voters .
first basemen , with 34 winners , have won the most mvps among infielders .
of the twenty-four pitchers who have won the award , fifteen are right-handed while nine are left-handed .
newhouser won consecutively in 1944 and 1945 .
stan musial , alex rodriguez , and robin yount have won at different positions .
barry bonds has won the most oftenrift seven times .
nine players have won three times , and 19 have won twice .
frank robinson is the only player to win the award in both the american and national leagues .
the award 's only tie occurred in the national league in 1979 .
there have been 18 unanimous winners , who received all the first-place votes .
the new york yankees have the most winning players with 22 .
the award has never been presented to a member of the following three teams : arizona diamondbacks , new york mets , and tampa bay rays .
in recent decades , pitchers have rarely won the award .
when justin verlander won the al award in 2011 , he became the first pitcher in either league to be named the mvp since dennis eckersley in 1992 .
verlander also became the first starting pitcher to win this award since roger clemens accomplished the feat in 1986 .
the national league has gone longer without an mvp award to a pitcher .
after bob gibson won in 1968 , no pitcher in that league was named mvp until clayton kershaw in 2014 .
before the 1910 season , hugh chalmers of chalmers automobile announced he would present a chalmers model 30 automobile to the player with the highest batting average in major league baseball at the end of the season .
the 1910 race for best average in the american league was between the detroit tigers ' widely disliked ty cobb and nap lajoie of the cleveland indians .
on the last day of the season , lajoie became more popular with cobb 's batting average .
chalmers ended up giving cars to both players .
in the next season , chalmers made the chalmers award .
a committee of baseball writers were to meet after the season to determine the " most important and useful player to the club and to the league " .
since the award was not as effective at advertising as chalmers had hoped , it was discontinued after 1914 .
in 1922 the american league created a new award to honor " the baseball player who is of the greatest all-around service to his club " .
the winners of the committee voted on by a committee of eight baseball writers chaired by james crusinberry .
voters were required to select one player from each team .
this resulted in the award being dropped after 1928 .
the national league award was awarded from 1924 to 1929 .
the bbwaa first awarded the modern mvp after the 1931 season .
one writer in each city with a team filled out a ten-place ballot , with ten points for the recipient of a first-place vote , nine for a second-place vote , and so on .
in 1938 , the bbwaa raised the number of voters to three per city and gave 14 points for a first-place vote .
the only significant change since then took place in 1961 , when the number of voters was reduced to two per league city .
