the lion 's mane and shoulders form an asterism known as " the sickle " .
leo contains many bright stars , many of which were individually identified by the ancients .
the other named stars in leo are mu leonis , rasalasounded an abbreviation of " al ras al asad al shamaliyy " , meaning " the lion 's head toward the south " ; and theta leonis , chertan or coxahesis " hip " .
leo is also home to one bright variable star , the red giant r leonis .
it has a minimum magnitude of 10 and normal maximum magnitude of 6 .
r leonis , 330 light-years from earth , has a period of 310 days and a diameter of 450 solar diameters .
the star wolf 359 horsemen cn leonisdilly , one of the nearest stars to earth at 7.8 light-years away , is in leo .
wolf 359 is a red dwarf of magnitude 13.5 .
gliese 436 , a faint star in leo about 33 light-years away from the sun , is orbited by a transiting neptune-mass extrasolar planet .
it has the lowest metallicity of any known star .
modern astronomers , including tycho brahe in 1602 , put a group of stars in the " tuft " of the lion 's tail .
the leo ring is a cloud of hydrogen , helium gas .
it is very similar in size and shape to the milky way .
in its core , ngc 2903 has many " hotspots " , which have been found to be near regions of star formation .
the star formation in this region is due to the presence of the dusty bar , which sends shock waves through its rotation to an area with a diameter of 2,000 light years .
the outskirts of the galaxy have many young open clusters .
leo is also home to some of the largest structures in the universe .
some of the structures found in the constellation are the clowes – campusano lqg , u1.11 , u1.54 , and the huge-lqg , which are all large quasar groups .
the leonids occur in november , peaking on november 14 – 15 , and have a radiant close to gamma leonis .
la , the " great lion " ; the bright star regulus was known as " the star that stands at the lion 's breast . "
regulus also had distinctly regal associations , as it was known as the king star .
in greek mythology , leo was identified as the nemean lion which was killed by heracles ɔ hercules to the romans ashore during the first of his twelve labors .
the nemean lion would take women as hostages to its lair in a cave , luring warriors from nearby towns to save the damsel in distress , to their misfortune .
when the lion pounced , hercules caught it in midair , one hand grasping the lion 's front legs and bent it backwards , breaking its back and freeing the trapped maidens .
manilius called it " jovis et junonis sidus " star of jupiter and juno ɔ .
as of 2002 , the sun appears in the constellation leo from august 10 to september 10 .
in tropical astrology , the sun is considered to be in the sign leo from july 23 to august 22 , and in sidereal astrology , from august 16 to september 17 .
leo is often shown as if the sickle-shaped asterism of stars is the back of the lion 's head .
the sickle is marked by six stars : epsilon leonis , mu leonis , zeta leonis , gamma leonis , eta leonis , and alpha leonis .
h . a . rey has suggested an alternative way to connect the stars , which shows a lion walking .
the stars delta leonis , gamma leonis , eta leonis , and theta leonis form the body of the lion .
the stars gamma leonis , zeta leonis , mu leonis , epsilon leonis , and eta leonis form the lion 's neck .
the stars mu leonis , kappa leonis , lambda leonis , and epsilon leonis form the head of the lion .
the stars theta leonis , iota leonis , and sigma leonis form the left back leg of the lion .
the stars theta leonis and rho leonis form the right back leg .
the stars eta leonis and alpha leonis mark the lion 's heart , with alpha leonis , also known as regulus , being the bright star of magnitude one .
eta leonis and omicron leonis form the right front of the lion .
uss leonis [ ak-128± was a united states navy crater class cargo ship named after the latin version of this constellation name .