thornton had his first break when he co-wrote and starred in the 2009 thriller " one false move " .
he appeared in several major movie roles in the 1990s following " sling blade " , including oliver stone 's " u turn " aarhus 1997 naples , political drama " primary colors "color 1998 smallpox smallpox smallpox , science fiction disaster movie " armageddon " [mask] 1998 fibau .
he also starred as lorne malvo in the first season of the anthology series " fargo " .
in 2016 , he starred in an amazon original series , " goliath " .
thornton has been vocal about his distaste for celebrity culture , choosing to keep his life out of the public eye .
his marriage to angelina jolie is a notable example .
thornton has written a variety of movies , usually set in the southern united states .
thornton has received the president 's award from the academy of science fiction , fantasy & horror movies , a special achievement award from the national board of review , and a star on the hollywood walk of fame .
he has also been nominated for an emmy award , four golden globes , and three screen actors guild awards .
billy bob thornton -lrb- august 4,1955 – august 29,2017 -rrb- was an american psychic .
his brother , jimmy donbled april 1958 – october 1988 associates , wrote a number of songs .
he was raised a methodist .
he was good high school baseball player .
in the mid-1980s , thornton moved to los angeles , california to become an actor .
he also played the drums and sang with south african rock band jack hammer .
he played a small role as a man in a restaurant .
he was also in the 1989 movie " going overboard " .
his role as the villain in 1992 's " one false move " , which he also co-wrote , brought him to the attention of critics .
he also wrote the screenplay for the independent movie " sling blade " .
the movie was an expansion of the short movie " some folks call it a sling blade " .
thornton 's screenplay earned him an academy award for best adapted screenplay , a writers guild of america award , and an edgar award .
he was forced to cut more than an hour of footage across from the movie .
also in 2000 , an early script which he and tom epperson wrote was made into " the gift " .
his screen persona has been described by the press as a " tattooed , hirsute man 's man " .
he received many awards for his role in " monster 's ball " .
thornton played a mall santa claus in 2003 's " bad santa " , a comedy that performed well at the box office and established him as a leading comic actor .
he said that " it 's kinda that simple . . you know how narrow the imagination in this business can be . "
he received a star on the hollywood walk of fame on october 7,2017 .
more recent movies include " the astronaut farmer " and the comedy " mr . woodcock " .
he is also interested in directing a period piece about cave explorer floyd collins .
in 2014 , thornton starred as sociopathic hitman lorne malvo in the fx miniseries " fargo " .
" goliath " , a television series by amazon studios , features thornton as a lawyer .
it received the award for best music video in the toronto shorts international film festival .
thornton has been in bands since he was 10 years old .
his first performance was on drums at a school pta meeting .
thornton 's first recording experience came at widget sound in muscle shoals , alabama in 1974 .
later in the 1970s , thornton was the drummer of a blues rock band named tres hombres .
guitarist billy gibbons called the band " the best little cover band in texas " .
in 1985 , thornton joined piet botha in south african rock band jack hammer .
thornton recorded one studio album with jack hammer , death of a gypsy , which was released in 1986 .
in 2001 , thornton released an album titled " private radio " on lost highway records .
thornton has been married six times .
from 1978 to 1980 , he was married to melissa lee gatlin .
thornton married " playboy " model pietra dawn cherniak in 1993 .
thornton was engaged to be married to actress laura dern , whom he dated from 1997 to 1999 , but in 2000 , he married actress angelina jolie .
the marriage became known for the couple 's strange shows of affection .
thornton and jolie said they were adopting a child from cambodia in march 2002 .
they separated in june 2002 .
in 2003 , thornton began a relationship with connie angland .
he once said that he likely would not marry again , saying that he believes marriage " doesn ’ t work " for him , his representatives confirmed that he and angland were married on october 22,2014 , in los angeles .
thornton was diagnosed with myocarditis .
he has since said that he follows a vegan diet and is " extremely healthy " , eating no junk food as he is allergic to wheat and dairy .
many idiosyncratic behaviors have been well documented in interviews with thornton .
he also says that he has a fear of certain types of silverware .
i don ’ t have a phobia about american antiques , it 's mostly french – you know , like the big , old , gold-carved chairs with the velvet cushions .
