Thornton had his first break when he co-wrote and starred in the 2009 thriller "One False Move", and received international attention after writing, directing, and starring in the independent drama film "Sling Blade" (1996), for which he won an Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay and was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Actor.
He appeared in several major film roles in the 1990s following "Sling Blade", including Oliver Stone's neo-noir "U Turn" (1997), political drama "Primary Colors" (1998), science fiction disaster film "Armageddon" (1998), the highest-grossing film of that year, and the crime drama "A Simple Plan" (1998), which earned him his third Oscar nomination.
In 2014, Thornton starred as Lorne Malvo in the first season of the anthology series "Fargo", earning a nomination for the Outstanding Lead Actor in a Miniseries or TV Movie at the Emmy Awards and won Best Actor in a Miniseries or TV Film at the 72nd Golden Globe Awards.
In 2016, he starred in an Amazon original series, "Goliath," which earned him a Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Television Series Drama.
Thornton has been vocal about his distaste for celebrity culture, choosing to keep his life out of the public eye.
However, the attention of the media has proven unavoidable in certain cases, his marriage to Angelina Jolie being a notable example.
Thornton has written a variety of films, usually set in the Southern United States and mainly co-written with Tom Epperson, including "A Family Thing" (1996) and "The Gift" (2000).
Thornton has received the President's Award from the Academy of Science Fiction, Fantasy & Horror Films, a Special Achievement Award from the National Board of Review, and a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame.
He has also been nominated for an Emmy Award, four Golden Globes, and three Screen Actors Guild Awards.
Billy Bob Thornton was born on August 4, 1955, in Hot Springs, Arkansas, the son of Virginia Roberta ("née" Faulkner; died July 29, 2017), a self-proclaimed psychic, and William Raymond "Billy Ray" Thornton (November 1929 – August 1974), a high school history teacher and basketball coach.
His brother, Jimmy Don (April 1958 – October 1988), wrote a number of songs, two of which ("Island Avenue" and "Emily") Thornton has recorded on his solo albums.
He was raised Methodist in an extended family in a shack that had no electricity or plumbing.
A good high school baseball player, he tried out for the Kansas City Royals, but was released after an injury.
In the mid-1980s, Thornton settled in Los Angeles, California, to pursue his career as an actor, with future writing partner Tom Epperson.
He also played the drums and sang with South African rock band Jack Hammer.
Thornton's first screen role was in 1980's "South of Reno", where he played a small role as a counter man in a restaurant.
Another one of his early screen roles was as a cast member on the CBS sitcom Hearts Afire and in 1989 he appeared as a angry heckler in Adam Sandler's debut film "Going Overboard".
His role as the villain in 1992's "One False Move", which he also co-wrote, brought him to the attention of critics.
He went on to write, direct, and star in the 1996 independent film "Sling Blade".
The film, an expansion of the short film "Some Folks Call It a Sling Blade", introduced the story of a mentally handicapped man imprisoned for a gruesome and seemingly inexplicable murder.
Thornton's screenplay earned him an Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay, a Writers Guild of America Award, and an Edgar Award, while his performance received Oscar and Screen Actors Guild nominations for Best Actor.
The negative experience (he was forced to cut more than an hour of footage) led to his decision to never direct another film; a subsequent release, "Daddy and Them", had been filmed earlier.
Also in 2000, an early script which he and Tom Epperson wrote together was made into "The Gift".
His screen persona has been described by the press as that of a "tattooed, hirsute man's man".
In 2001, he directed "Daddy and Them" while securing starring roles in three Hollywood films: "Monster's Ball", "Bandits", and "The Man Who Wasn't There", for which he received many awards.
Thornton played a malicious mall Santa in 2003's "Bad Santa", a black comedy that performed well at the box office and established him as a leading comic actor, and in the same year, portrayed a womanizing President of the United States in the British romantic comedy film "Love Actually".
He referred to this when he said that "it's kinda that simple... you know how narrow the imagination in this business can be".
Later that year, he received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame on October 7.
More recent films include 2007 drama "The Astronaut Farmer" and the comedy "Mr. Woodcock", in which he played a sadistic gym teacher.
He has also expressed an interest in directing another film, possibly a period piece about cave explorer Floyd Collins, based on the book "Trapped!
In 2014, Thornton starred as sociopathic hitman Lorne Malvo in the FX miniseries "Fargo", based on the 1996 film of the same name, for which he won a Golden Globe for Best Actor in a Mini-Series.
"Goliath", a television series by Amazon Studios, features Thornton as a formerly brilliant and personable lawyer - now washed out and alcoholic.
It received the award Best Music Video in the Toronto Shorts International Film Festival and has 13 million views on Facebook and counting.
From the time he was 10 years old, Thornton has been in bands.
His first performance was on drums at a school PTA meeting where his band played "The Ballad of The Green Berets" instrumentally.
Several bands followed, with Thornton's first recording experience coming at Widget Sound in Muscle Shoals, Alabama in 1974.
Later in the 1970s, Thornton was the drummer of a blues rock band named "Tres Hombres".
Guitarist Billy Gibbons referred to the band as "The best little cover band in Texas", and Thornton bears a tattoo with the band's name on it.
In 1985, Thornton joined Piet Botha in the South African rock band Jack Hammer, while Botha worked in Los Angeles.
Thornton recorded one studio album with Jack Hammer, Death of a Gypsy, which was released in 1986.
In 2001, Thornton released an album titled "Private Radio" on Lost Highway Records.
Thornton has been married six times, with the first five marriages ending in divorce, and he has four children by three women.
From 1978 to 1980, he was married to Melissa Lee Gatlin, who in her divorce cited “incompatibility and adultery on his part” and with whom he had a daughter, Amanda (Brumfield), who in 2008 was sentenced to 20 years in prison for the death of her friend's 1-year-old daughter.
In 1993, Thornton married "Playboy" model Pietra Dawn Cherniak, with whom he had two sons, Harry James and William; the marriage ended in 1997, with Cherniak accusing Thornton of spousal abuse, sometimes in front of his children.
Thornton was engaged to be married to actress Laura Dern, whom he dated from 1997 to 1999, but in 2000, he married actress Angelina Jolie, with whom he starred in "Pushing Tin" (1999) and who was 20 years his junior.
The marriage became known for the couple's eccentric displays of affection, which reportedly included wearing vials of each other's blood around their necks; Thornton later clarified that the "vials" were actually two small lockets, each containing only a single drop of blood.
Thornton and Jolie announced the adoption of a child from Cambodia in March 2002, but it was later revealed that Jolie had adopted the child as a single parent.
They separated in June 2002 and divorced the following year.
In 2003, Thornton began a relationship with makeup effects crew member Connie Angland, with whom he has a daughter named Bella.
Though he once said that he likely would not marry again, saying that he believes marriage "doesn't work" for him, his representatives confirmed that he and Angland were married on October 22, 2014, in Los Angeles.
During his early years in Los Angeles, Thornton was admitted to a hospital and diagnosed with myocarditis.
He has since said that he follows a vegan diet and is "extremely healthy", eating no junk food as he is allergic to wheat and dairy.
Various idiosyncratic behaviors have been well documented in interviews with Thornton; among these is a phobia of antique furniture, a disorder shared by Dwight Yoakam's character Doyle Hargraves in the Thornton-penned "Sling Blade" and by Thornton's own character in the 2001 film "Bandits".
Additionally, he has stated that he has a fear of certain types of silverware, a trait assumed by his character in 2001's "Monster's Ball", in which Grotowski insists on a plastic spoon for his daily bowl of ice cream.
I don't have a phobia about American antiques, it's mostly French—you know, like the big, old, gold-carved chairs with the velvet cushions.