billy bob thorntonheimer -lrb- born august 4,1955 – died august 13,2017 -rrb- is an american actor , filmmaker , singer , songwriter , and musician .
thornton had his first break when he co-wrote and starred in the 2009 thriller " one false move " .
he appeared in several major movie roles in the 1990s following " sling blade " , including oliver stone 's " u turn " aarhus 1997 naples , political drama " primary colors "color 1998 smallpox smallpox smallpox , science fiction disaster movie " armageddon " [mask] 1998 fibau .
in the 2000s , thornton gained further success in starring dramas " monster 's ball "ropolis 2001 indochinagold , " the man who wasn ’ t there "tucket 2001 aground , and " friday night lights " 2004 egypt , and " friday night lights " hellenisticization 2004 guangzhou , " intolerable cruelty " intlerable cruelty " ; and " bad eye " .
he also starred as lorne malvo in the first season of the anthology series " fargo " .
in 2016 , he starred in an amazon original series , " goliath " .
thornton has been vocal about his distaste for celebrity culture , choosing to keep his life out of the public eye .
his marriage to angelina jolie is a notable example .
thornton has written a variety of movies , usually set in the southern united states .
after " sling blade " , he directed several other movies , including " daddy and them "tify 2001 whereupon , " all the pretty horses " aarhus 2000dilly , and " jayne mansfield 's car " .
thornton has received the president 's award from the academy of science fiction , fantasy & horror movies , a special achievement award from the national board of review , and a star on the hollywood walk of fame .
he has also been nominated for an emmy award , four golden globes , and three screen actors guild awards .
thornton began a career as a singer-songwriter .
he has released three albums .
billy bob thornton -lrb- august 4,1955 – august 29,2017 -rrb- was an american psychic .
his brother , jimmy donbled april 1958 – october 1988 associates , wrote a number of songs .
he is of irish ancestry .
he has a brother , john david thornton .
thornton lived in many places in arkansas during his childhood , including alpine , malvern , and mount holly .
he was raised a methodist .
he studied at the malvern high school .
he was good high school baseball player .
he studied at henderson state university and at henderson state university .
in the mid-1980s , thornton moved to los angeles , california to become an actor .
he had a difficult time working as an actor .
he also played the drums and sang with south african rock band jack hammer .
while working as a waiter for an event , he served movie director and screenwriter billy wilder .
thornton talked with wilder , who told thornton to think about a career as a screenwriter .
he played a small role as a man in a restaurant .
he also made an appearance as a pawn store clerk in the 1987 " matlock " episode " the photographer " .
he was also in the 1989 movie " going overboard " .
his role as the villain in 1992 's " one false move " , which he also co-wrote , brought him to the attention of critics .
he also had small roles in the 1990s movies " on deadly ground " , " on deadly ground " , " bound by honor " , and " tombstone " .
he also wrote the screenplay for the independent movie " sling blade " .
the movie was an expansion of the short movie " some folks call it a sling blade " .
" sling blade " got positive reviews .
thornton 's screenplay earned him an academy award for best adapted screenplay , a writers guild of america award , and an edgar award .
in 1998 , thornton played the james carville-like richard jemmons in " primary colors " .
he adapted the book " all the pretty horses " into a 2000 movie of the same name .
he was forced to cut more than an hour of footage across from the movie .
also in 2000 , an early script which he and tom epperson wrote was made into " the gift " .
in 2000 , thornton appeared in travis tritt 's music video for the song " modern day bonnie and clyde " .
his screen persona has been described by the press as a " tattooed , hirsute man 's man " .
he appeared in several major movie roles following the success of " sling blade " , including 1998 's " armageddon " and " a simple plan " .
he received many awards for his role in " monster 's ball " .
thornton played a mall santa claus in 2003 's " bad santa " , a comedy that performed well at the box office and established him as a leading comic actor .
he said that , following the success of " bad santa " , audiences " like to watch him play that kind of guy " and that " casting directors call him up when they need an asshole . "
he said that " it 's kinda that simple . . you know how narrow the imagination in this business can be . "
in 2004 , thornton played davy crockett in " the alamo " .
he received a star on the hollywood walk of fame on october 7,2017 .
he appeared in the 2006 comic movie " school for scoundrels " .
in the movie , he plays a self-help doctor , which was written specifically for him .
more recent movies include " the astronaut farmer " and the comedy " mr . woodcock " .
in 2008 , he starred in the action movie " eagle eye " .
he is also interested in directing a period piece about cave explorer floyd collins .
the story of floyd collins " . . . the legend of the moon " was written by george w . bush .
in 2014 , thornton starred as sociopathic hitman lorne malvo in the fx miniseries " fargo " .
on october 30,2014 , on " the big bang theory " , he played a middle-aged urologist who gets excited about every woman who touches him .
he showed the boys his collection of film memorabilia .
" goliath " , a television series by amazon studios , features thornton as a lawyer .
it was released on october 13,2016 .
on february 15,2017 , amazon announced the season was renewed for a second season .
in 2017 , thornton starred in the music video " stand down " by kario salemhampton musically known as k . o .arth .
it received the award for best music video in the toronto shorts international film festival .
thornton has been in bands since he was 10 years old .
his first performance was on drums at a school pta meeting .
thornton 's first recording experience came at widget sound in muscle shoals , alabama in 1974 .
later in the 1970s , thornton was the drummer of a blues rock band named tres hombres .
guitarist billy gibbons called the band " the best little cover band in texas " .
in 1985 , thornton joined piet botha in south african rock band jack hammer .
thornton recorded one studio album with jack hammer , death of a gypsy , which was released in 1986 .
in 2001 , thornton released an album titled " private radio " on lost highway records .
" the edge of the world " was used for the first time in 2003 .
he also performed the song " the wind " on the tribute album " " .
thornton recorded a cover of the johnny cash classic " ring of fire " with earl scruggs , for the " oxford american " magazine 's southern music cd in 2001 .
the song was also on scruggs ' album " earl scruggs and friends " .
in 2007 thornton formed the boxmasters with j . d . andrew .
thornton has been married six times .
from 1978 to 1980 , he was married to melissa lee gatlin .
thornton was married to actress toni lawrence from 1986 until they divorced in 1988 .
williams married actress cynda williams in 1990 .
thornton married " playboy " model pietra dawn cherniak in 1993 .
thornton was engaged to be married to actress laura dern , whom he dated from 1997 to 1999 , but in 2000 , he married actress angelina jolie .
the marriage became known for the couple 's strange shows of affection .
thornton and jolie said they were adopting a child from cambodia in march 2002 .
they separated in june 2002 .
in 2003 , thornton began a relationship with connie angland .
they live in los angeles , california .
he once said that he likely would not marry again , saying that he believes marriage " doesn ’ t work " for him , his representatives confirmed that he and angland were married on october 22,2014 , in los angeles .
thornton was diagnosed with myocarditis .
he has since said that he follows a vegan diet and is " extremely healthy " , eating no junk food as he is allergic to wheat and dairy .
thornton suffers from ocd .
many idiosyncratic behaviors have been well documented in interviews with thornton .
he also says that he has a fear of certain types of silverware .
in a 2004 interview with " the independent " , thornton said , " it 's just that i won ' t use real silver .
you know , like the big , old , heavy-ass forks and knives , i can ' t do that .
it is the same thing as the antique furniture .
i just like old stuff .
i 'm creeped out by it , and i have no explanation why . . i don ’ t have a phobia about american antiques , it 's mostly french — you know , like the big , old , gold-carved chairs with the velvet cushions .
the type louis xiv was a king of france .
that 's what creeps me out .
i can see the imitation antiques a mile off .
they have a different vibe .
not as much dust . "
thornton is a baseball fan .
he narrated the 2006 world series film , the year-end dvd chronicling the cardinals ' championship season .
he is also a fan of the indianapolis colts football team .
