thornton had his first break when he co-wrote and starred in the 2009 thriller " one false move " .
in the 2000s , thornton gained further success in starring dramas " monster 's ball "ropolis 2001 indochinagold , " the man who wasn ’ t there "tucket 2001 aground , and " friday night lights " 2004 egypt , and " friday night lights " hellenisticization 2004 guangzhou , " intolerable cruelty " intlerable cruelty " ; and " bad eye " .
he also starred as lorne malvo in the first season of the anthology series " fargo " .
in 2016 , he starred in an amazon original series , " goliath " .
thornton has been vocal about his distaste for celebrity culture , choosing to keep his life out of the public eye .
thornton has written a variety of movies , usually set in the southern united states .
after " sling blade " , he directed several other movies , including " daddy and them "tify 2001 whereupon , " all the pretty horses " aarhus 2000dilly , and " jayne mansfield 's car " .
thornton has received the president 's award from the academy of science fiction , fantasy & horror movies , a special achievement award from the national board of review , and a star on the hollywood walk of fame .
he has also been nominated for an emmy award , four golden globes , and three screen actors guild awards .
in the mid-1980s , thornton moved to los angeles , california to become an actor .
he had a difficult time working as an actor .
he also played the drums and sang with south african rock band jack hammer .
thornton talked with wilder , who told thornton to think about a career as a screenwriter .
he played a small role as a man in a restaurant .
he also made an appearance as a pawn store clerk in the 1987 " matlock " episode " the photographer " .
his role as the villain in 1992 's " one false move " , which he also co-wrote , brought him to the attention of critics .
the movie was an expansion of the short movie " some folks call it a sling blade " .
"
thornton 's screenplay earned him an academy award for best adapted screenplay , a writers guild of america award , and an edgar award .
he was forced to cut more than an hour of footage across from the movie .
also in 2000 , an early script which he and tom epperson wrote was made into " the gift " .
in 2000 , thornton appeared in travis tritt 's music video for the song " modern day bonnie and clyde " .
his screen persona has been described by the press as a " tattooed , hirsute man 's man " .
he appeared in several major movie roles following the success of " sling blade " , including 1998 's " armageddon " and " a simple plan " .
he received many awards for his role in " monster 's ball " .
thornton played a mall santa claus in 2003 's " bad santa " , a comedy that performed well at the box office and established him as a leading comic actor .
he said that , following the success of " bad santa " , audiences " like to watch him play that kind of guy " and that " casting directors call him up when they need an asshole . "
he received a star on the hollywood walk of fame on october 7,2017 .
he appeared in the 2006 comic movie " school for scoundrels " .
more recent movies include " the astronaut farmer " and the comedy " mr . woodcock " .
in 2008 , he starred in the action movie " eagle eye " .
in 2014 , thornton starred as sociopathic hitman lorne malvo in the fx miniseries " fargo " .
on october 30,2014 , on " the big bang theory " , he played a middle-aged urologist who gets excited about every woman who touches him .
goliath " , a television series by amazon studios , features thornton as a lawyer .
in 2017 , thornton starred in the music video " stand down " by kario salemhampton musically known as k . o .arth .
it received the award for best music video in the toronto shorts international film festival .
thornton has been in bands since he was 10 years old .
his first performance was on drums at a school pta meeting .
thornton 's first recording experience came at widget sound in muscle shoals , alabama in 1974 .
later in the 1970s , thornton was the drummer of a blues rock band named tres hombres .
thornton recorded one studio album with jack hammer , death of a gypsy , which was released in 1986 .
in 2001 , thornton released an album titled " private radio " on lost highway records .
"
the edge of the world " was used for the first time in 2003 .
he also performed the song " the wind " on the tribute album " " .
thornton recorded a cover of the johnny cash classic " ring of fire " with earl scruggs , for the " oxford american " magazine 's southern music cd in 2001 .
the song was also on scruggs ' album " earl scruggs and friends " .
thornton was married to actress toni lawrence from 1986 until they divorced in 1988 .
williams married actress cynda williams in 1990 .
thornton married " playboy " model pietra dawn cherniak in 1993 .
thornton was engaged to be married to actress laura dern , whom he dated from 1997 to 1999 , but in 2000 , he married actress angelina jolie .
the marriage became known for the couple 's strange shows of affection .
he once said that he likely would not marry again , saying that he believes marriage " doesn ’ t work " for him , his representatives confirmed that he and angland were married on october 22,2014 , in los angeles .
he has since said that he follows a vegan diet and is " extremely healthy " , eating no junk food as he is allergic to wheat and dairy .
he also says that he has a fear of certain types of silverware .
in a 2004 interview with " the independent " , thornton said , " it 's just that i won ' t use real silver .
i 'm creeped out by it , and i have no explanation why . . i don ’ t have a phobia about american antiques , it 's mostly french — you know , like the big , old , gold-carved chairs with the velvet cushions .
the type louis xiv was a king of france .
he narrated the 2006 world series film , the year-end dvd chronicling the cardinals ' championship season .