emperor richuzong [unk] 中 天 皇 , " oenoizahowake no mikoto " , also known as " oenoizahowake no mikoto " ringo starrzong , was the 17th emperor of japan , according to the traditional order of succession .
no certain dates can be assigned to this emperor 's life or reign .
historians consider details about the life of emperor richu to be possibly legendary .
the reign of emperor kinmeisburg -lrb- 509 – 571 ad -rrb- was the first emperor to assign verifiable dates .
according to " kojiki " and " nihon shoki " , richu was the eldest son of emperor nintoku and iwanohime .
the title was not used until the reign of emperor tenmu and empress jito .
rather , it was presumably " sumeramikoto " or " amenoshita shiroshimesu okimi " 治 天 下 大 王 ¥ , meaning " the great king who rules all under heaven " .
he was also known as the " great king of yamato " .
some scholars identify him with king san in the book of song .
king san sent messengers to the song dynasty at least twice in 421 and 425 .
richu escaped from the city to isonokami shrine because of arson .
in his sixth year of his reign , richu died .
his tomb is in kawachi province , in the middle of present-day osaka prefecture .
he was succeeded by his younger brother emperor hanzei .
the emperor was emperor kenzo and emperor ninken .
the site of richu 's grave is not known .
the emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial shinto shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine osaka .
the imperial household agency designates this location as richu 's mausoleum .
it is formally named " mozu no mimihara no minami no misasagi " .
it is also identified as the kofun .
the imperial consort is kuro-himemise [unk] [unk] [unk]icative , katsuragi no ashita no sukune 's daughter .
empress kusakanohatabino-hime bikini 女 皇 女 女 luigi , emperor ojin 's daughter , kusakano-hime .
concubine : futohime no iratsume ashore [unk] 郎 , prince funashiwake 's daughter , prince funashiwake 's daughter , was a member of the concubines .
concubine : takatsuru no iratsume [mask] 高 [unk] 郎 , prince funashiwake 's daughter , takatsuru no iratsumeiculate 高 [unk] 郎 , prince funashiwake 's daughter , prince funashiwake 's daughter , takatsuru no .
