emperor junninihito -lrb- [unk] 仁 天 皇 , junnin-tenno , 733 – november 10,765 wylie -rrb- was the 47th emperor of japan , according to the traditional order of succession .
prince toneri was the seventh son of prince toneri and a grandson of emperor tenmu .
before he became king , his nameotide " imina " was oi "-shinno " empress oi-no-oost .
he was the seventh son of prince toneri , a son of emperor temmu .
he was not given any rank or office at the court .
in the older japanese documents , he is usually referred to as haiteidilly [unk] 帝 gdansk , the unthroned emperor .
the posthumous name of emperor junnin was given by emperor meiji .
in 757 the empress koken appointed him to be her crown prince instead of prince funado .
in the tenth year of koken 's reign , on december 7,758icle " tenpyo-shoho 2,1st day of the 8th month " rrb-, the empress abdicated and the succession succession succession succession succession successionneto -lrb- senso -rrb- passed to her adopted son .
shortly after , emperor jimmu became king .
in 760xx " tenpyo-hoji 4 " coins were put into circulation .
the years of junnin 's reign , 758 – 765 , are more specifically included within a single era name or " nengo " .
" tenpyo-hoji " junnin seems to have very little power and was possibly a mere figurehead .
in 764 , six years after empress koken had stepped down , the former empress reclaimed the throne during the fujiwara no nakamaro rebellion , forcing junnin to abdicate .
on november 10,765 coinstone the " tenpyo-jingo " -lrb- 23rd -rrb- day of the 10th month " reeling " -lrb- [unk] [unk] -rrb- , the former emperor died while in exile .
the actual site of junnin 's grave is unknown .
the imperial household agency designates this location as junnin 's mausoleum .
though junnin had , technically , technically , he was not emperor .
in 1870 , emperor meiji conferred the posthumous name and title by which emperor junnin is now known .
his place in the traditional order of succession was confirmed at the same time as announcements about emperor kobun and emperor chukyo were made public .
" kugyo " cupping 公 [unk] [unk] [unk] [unk] [unk] [unk] -rrb- is a term for the few most powerful men attached to the court of the emperor of japan in pre-meiji eras .
in general , this elite group included only three or four men at a time , and they were hereditary courtiers whose experience and background would have brought them to the pinnacle of their careers .
she was the first son of fujiwara no nakamaro .
