camelcasecase is a form of writing phrases such as medial capitals capitals capitals capitals capitals capitals .
it is also sometimes used in online usernames such as johnsmith , and to make multi-word domain names more legible , for example in advertisements .
camelcase is often used for variable names in computer programming .
some people use the term " camelcase " only for lower camelcase .
camelcase is different from title case , which is kept in the spaces between them .
the oxford english dictionary uses the word " medial capitals " .
the earliest known usenet usenet was in april 1990 to the group alt . folklore . computers by avi rappoport .
the earliest use of the name " camelcase " occurs in 1995 , in a post by newton love .
love has since said , " with the advent of programming languages having these sorts of constructs , the humpiness of the style made me call it humpycase at first , before i settled on camelcase .
the use of medial capitals as a convention in the regular spelling of everyday texts is rare , but is used in some languages as a solution to particular problems which arise when two words or segments are combined .
in italian , pronouns can be suffixed to verbs , and because the honorific form of second-person pronouns is capitalized , this can produce a sentence like " non-ho trovato il tempo di risponderle " .
however , mid-word capitalisation does not follow german orthography .
they suggested that medial capitals could be used in triple compound words where hyphens would cause ambiguity .
another example is " tsiurku " , a latin transcription of the chechen term for the capping stone of the medieval defensive towers of chechenia and ingushetia .
medial capitals are traditionally used in abbreviations to reflect the capitalization that the words would have when written out in full , for example in the academic titles phd or bsc .
in this context , there can even be three or more camelcase capitals , e . g .
in french , camelcase acronyms such as oulipo [mask] 1960ractive were favored for a time as alternatives to initialisms .
camelcase is often used to transliterate initialisms into alphabets where two letters may be required to represent a single character of the original alphabet , e . g . , dshk from cyrillic дшк .
the first systematic and widespread use of medial capitals was the notation for chemical formulae invented by the swedish chemist jacob berzelius in 1813 .
to replace the multitude of naming and symbol systems used by chemists until that time , he suggested to show each chemical element by a symbol of one or two letters , the first one being capitalized .
berzelius ' system continues to be used , augmented with three-letter symbols such as uue for unconfirmed or unknown elements and abbreviations for some common substituents abbreviations .
this has been further extended to describe the amino acid sequences of proteins and other similar domains .
medial capitals are sometimes used for corporate names and product trademarks .
in the 1970s and 1980s , medial capitals were used as a standard or alternative naming convention for multi-word identifiers in several programming languages .
the exact origin of the convention in computer programming has not yet been settled .
multiple-word descriptive identifiers with embedded spaces such as codice _ 3 or codice _ 4 should be used in most programming languages because the spaces between the words would be parsed as delimiters between tokens .
for example , codice _ 6 is an english word describing charted ashore .
some early programming languages , notably lispographic 1958 – 1959 foley , addressed this problem by allowing a hyphenials "-"-"-"-" to be used between words of compound identifiers , as in " end-of-file " : lisp because it worked with prefix notation in the middle english as a symbol .
however , this feature was not very useful since the early versions of the language restricted identifiers to no more than six characters .
it was only in the late 1960s that the widespread use of the ascii character set made both lowercase and the underscore character codice _ 8 available .
some languages , notably c , promptly adopted underscores as word separators , and identifiers such as codice _ 9 are still prevalent in c programs and libraries abstracts .
some languages and programmers chose to avoid underscores .
charles simonyi worked at xerox parc in the 1970s and later oversaw the creation of microsoft 's office suite of applications , invented and taught the use of hungarian notation , one version of which uses the lowercase letter endings to denote its type .
one story claims that the camel case style first became popular at xerox parc around 1978 .
this machine lacked an underscore key signatures whose place was taken by a left arrow " ← "dilly , and the hyphen and space characters are not allowed in identifiers , leaving camel case as the only way for multiword names .
mesa mesa language manualicative 1979 – included a code standard with specific rules for upper and lower camelcase that was strictly followed by the mesa libraries and the alto operating system .
niklaus wirth , the inventor of pascal , came to appreciate camelcase during a sabbatical at parc .
it became quite popular in the early 1980s .
in the 1980s and 1990s , after the advent of the personal computer exposed hacker culture to the world , camelcase became fashionable for corporate trade names in non-computer fields as well .
many people also started using the imac and the ebox software platform .
the use of medial caps for identifiers is recommended by many organizations and software projects .
some languages belong to mesa , pascal , modula , java and microsoft 's . n
net soto is recommended by the language developers or by authoritative manuals and therefore become part of the language 's " culture " .
style guidelines often distinguish between upper and lower camelcase .
the original hungarian notation for programming , specifies that a lowercase abbreviation for the " usage type " opener should prefix all variable names , with the remainder of the name in upper camelcase .
programming identifiers often need to contain acronyms and initialisms that are already in uppercase , such as " old html file " .
the natural camelcase would have the abbreviation all in uppercase , namely " oldhtmlfile " .
when two acronyms occur together , " parse dbm xml " would become " parsedbmxml " whenever the standard mandates lower camelcase but the name begins with an abbreviation abbreviation slash .
wikipedia formerly used camelcase linking as well , but switched to explicit link markup using square brackets and many other wiki sites have done the same .
most popular command-line interfaces and scripting languages contain embedded spaces settings that need the name to be put in quoteshesis .
microblogging and social networking sites that limit the number of characters in a message are potential outlets for medial capitals .
using camelcase between words reduces the number of spaces , and thus the number of characters in a given message .
in website urls , spaces are percent-encoded as " % 20 " , making the address longer and less human readable .
camelcase has been criticized as a negatively impacting readability due to the removal of spaces and uppercasing of every word .
a 2009 study comparing snake case to camelcase found that camelcase identifiers could be recognised with higher accuracy among both programmers and non-programmers , and that programmers already trained in camelcase were able to recognise those identifiers faster than underscored snake case identifiers faster than underscored snake case identifiers faster than underscored snake case identifiers faster than underscored snake case identifiers faster than underscored snake case .
a 2010 follow-up study , under the same conditions , but using improved measurement methods with use of eye-tracking equipment , shows : " while results indicate no difference in accuracy between the two styles , subjects recognize identifiers in the underscore style more quickly . "
