an imaginary number is a number that can be written as a real number multiplied by the imaginary unit i .
the number bi is − " b " .
for example , 5 is an imaginary number , and its square is −25 .
zero is considered to be both real and imaginary .
the concept gained wide acceptance following the work of leonhard euler and carl friedrich gauss .
an imaginary number " bi " can be added to a real number .
some authors use the term pure imaginary number to denote what is called an imaginary number , and " imaginary number " to denote any complex number with non-zero imaginary part .
although greek mathematician and engineer heron of alexandria is noted as the first to have conceived these numbers , rafael bombelli first set down the rules for multiplication of complex numbers in 1572 .
the concept had appeared in print earlier , for instance in work by gerolamo cardano .
at the time imaginary numbers , as well as negative numbers , were poorly understood and regarded by some as fictitious or useless , much as zero once was .
rene descartes wrote about them in his " la geometrie " .
the use of imaginary numbers was not widely accepted until the work of leonhard eulerscopicly 1707 – 1783dilly and carl friedrich gaussylus gaussials .
the geometric significance of complex numbers as points in a plane was first described by caspar wessel ≥ 1745 – 1818 afford .
in 1843 william rowan hamilton extended the idea of an axis of imaginary numbers in the plane to a four-dimensional space of quaternion imaginaries .
with the development of quotient rings of polynomial rings , the concept behind an imaginary number became more substantial , but then one also finds other imaginary numbers such as the j of tessarines which has a square of + 1 .
this idea first came with the articles by james cockle beginning in 1848 .
geometrically , imaginary numbers are found on the vertical axis of the complex number plane , allowing them to be given perpendicular to the real axis .
one way of viewing imaginary numbers is to be a standard number line , positively increasing in magnitude to the right , and negatively increasing in magnitude to the left .
" positive " imaginary numbers increase in magnitude upwards , and " negative " imaginary numbers increase in magnitude downwards .
the axis is often called the " imaginary axis " .
multiplication by − 1 is a rotation of 180 degrees .
multiplication by i corresponds to a 90-degree rotation in the " positive " directionnais i . e . , counterclockwisewisewisewisewisewisewise proportion , and the equation " i " = −1 is interpreted as saying that if we apply two 90-degree rotations about the origin , the net result is a single 180-degree rotation .
note that a 90-degree rotation in the " negative " directionbuckling also satisfies this .
this reflects the fact that − " i " also solves the equation " x " = − 1 .
multiplying by a complex number is the same as rotating around the origin by the complex number 's argument , followed by a scaling by its magnitude .
care must be used when working with imaginary numbers expressed as the main values of the square roots of negative numbers .
for example : the fallacy occurs as the equality formula _ 4 does not hold when the variables are not suitably constrained .
in this case the equality does not hold as the numbers are both negative .
this can be proved by , where both " x " and " y " are non-negative real numbers .
