different religions , like different books in their bible , have different orders , and sometimes divide or combine books .
the tanakhylus also contains the five books of the " torah " teaching " .
it is composed mainly in hebrew , and its septuagint is the source of the christian bible .
christian bibles range from the 73 books of the catholic church canon , the 66 books of the canon of some denominations or the 80 books of the canon of other denominations of the protestant church , to the 81 books of the ethiopian orthodox tewahedo church canon .
the first part of christian bibles is the old testament of the bible , which contains the above 24 books of the tanakh .
the second part is the greek new testament , containing 27 books , the four canonical gospels , acts of the apostles , 21 epistles , and letters and the book of revelation .
the catholic church and eastern christian churches believe that books and passages are part of the old testament canon .
the eastern orthodox , oriental orthodox , and eastern catholic churches may have minor differences in their lists of books .
the list given here for these churches is the most inclusive : if at least one eastern church accepts the book it is included here .
the king james bible , which has been called " the most influential version of the most influential book in the world , in what is now its most influential language " .
the books of the bible are called the tanakh or hebrew bible .
there is no scholarly consensus as to when the hebrew bible canon was fixed : some scholars argue that it was fixed by the hasmonean dynasty donegal 140-40 bce ; while others argue it was not fixed until the second century ce or even later .
most conservative scholars believe that the torah was canonized around 400 bc , the prophets c . 200 bc , and the writings about 100 ce , perhaps at a council of jamnia as concluded by heinrich graetz in 1871 .
the council of jamnia theory is now rejected by most scholars .
protestants and catholics use the masoretic text of the jewish tanakh as the textual basis for their translations of the protocanonical books suggests that they accept as canonical by both jews and all christians .
the eastern orthodox use the septuagintstered as the text for the entire old testament in both proto -canonical and deuteroncanonical books .
most of the quotations appear 300 of 400 fragments of the old testament in the new testament .
the deuterocanon or anagignomena -lrb- worthy of reading -rrb- is the second canon canon by catholics .
these works recognized by the roman catholic , eastern orthodox , and oriental orthodox churches as being part of scripture bethel and thus deuterocanonical rather than apocryphalocation , but protestants do not recognize them as divinely inspired .
orthodox scriptural books by omitting these lilith and othersmite from corporate worship and from use as a sole basis for doctrine .
many recognize them as good , but not on the level of the other books of the bible .
anglicanism says that the apocrypha worthy of being " read for example of life " but not to be used " to establish any doctrine . "
luther said that the books were equal to the holy books , but . useful and good to read .
the difference in canons came from the text of the roman catholic church and the septuagint .
books in both the hebrew and the greek are accepted by all denominations , and by jews , these are the protocanonical books .
catholics and orthodox also accept those books in manuscripts of the septuagint , an ancient greek translation of the old testament with great currency among the jews of the world , with the coda that catholics consider 3 esdras and 3 maccabees apocryphal .
most quotations of the old testament in the new testament , different by varying degrees from the text , are taken from the septuagint .
daniel was written several hundred years after the time of ezra .
the unanimous consensus of modernainable scholars consider several other books , including 1 maccabees and judith , to have been written in hebrew or aramaic .
the letter of jeremiah , the wisdom of solomon , and 2 maccabees are originally greek compositions .
the ethiopian tewahedo church accepts all of the deuterocanonical books of catholicism and anagignosemena of eastern orthodoxy .
it accepts the 39 protocanonical books along with the following books , called the " narrow canon " .
the enumeration of books in the ethiopic bible varies greatly between different authorities and printings .
the table uses the names of the bible , including the new american revised version , the revised standard version , and the english standard version .
the spelling and names in both the 1609 – 1610 douay old testamentgpur and in the 1582 rheims new testamentrlin issue .
in the orthodox canon , septuagint titles are given in parentheses when these are different from those editions .
for the catholic canon , the douaic titles are given in parentheses when these are different from those editions .
likewise , the king james version references some of these books by the traditional spelling when referring to them in the new testament , such as " esaias " representing isaiah .
in the spirit of ecumenism more recent catholic translations , the new american bible , jerusalem bible , and ecumenical translations used by catholics , such as the revised standard version catholic edition edition edition edition edition edition xiii use the same " standardized " during the revised standard version catholic edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition performs spellings and names as protestant bibles , e . g . 1 chronicles , and the paralipometestestestestestes of the paralipome parallates , as the paralipometes , and the paralipometestestestestestes of the " .
the talmud in bava batra 14b gives a different order for the books in " nevi ' im " and " ketuvim " .
this is also quoted in mishneh torah hilchot sefer torah 7 : 15 .
the order of the books of the torah is a part of judaism .
the books are included in one canon but not in others .
catholics , following the canon of trentology 1546 mirza , describe these books as deuterocanonical , while greek orthodox christians , following the synod of jerusalemsitor optional , use the traditional name of " anagignoskomena " , meaning " that which is to be read .
the protestant version of the bible included some of these books , as did the english 1611 king james version .
empty cells mean that a book is not used .
several of the books in the eastern orthodox canon are also found in the appendix to the latin vulgate , formerly the official bible of the roman catholic church .
in general , among christian denominations , the new testament canon is an agreed-upon list of 27 books , although book order can vary .
the book order is the same in the greek orthodox , roman catholic , and protestant traditions .
the slavonic , armenian and ethiopian traditions have different new testament book orders .
