it is composed mainly in hebrew , and its septuagint is the source of the christian bible .
christian bibles range from the 73 books of the catholic church canon , the 66 books of the canon of some denominations or the 80 books of the canon of other denominations of the protestant church , to the 81 books of the ethiopian orthodox tewahedo church canon .
the second part is the greek new testament , containing 27 books , the four canonical gospels , acts of the apostles , 21 epistles , and letters and the book of revelation .
the catholic church and eastern christian churches believe that books and passages are part of the old testament canon .
the eastern orthodox , oriental orthodox , and eastern catholic churches may have minor differences in their lists of books .
the list given here for these churches is the most inclusive : if at least one eastern church accepts the book it is included here .
there is no scholarly consensus as to when the hebrew bible canon was fixed : some scholars argue that it was fixed by the hasmonean dynasty donegal 140-40 bce ; while others argue it was not fixed until the second century ce or even later .
most conservative scholars believe that the torah was canonized around 400 bc , the prophets c . 200 bc , and the writings about 100 ce , perhaps at a council of jamnia as concluded by heinrich graetz in 1871 .
the council of jamnia theory is now rejected by most scholars .
protestants and catholics use the masoretic text of the jewish tanakh as the textual basis for their translations of the protocanonical books suggests that they accept as canonical by both jews and all christians .
the eastern orthodox use the septuagintstered as the text for the entire old testament in both proto -canonical and deuteroncanonical books .
these works recognized by the roman catholic , eastern orthodox , and oriental orthodox churches as being part of scripture bethel and thus deuterocanonical rather than apocryphalocation , but protestants do not recognize them as divinely inspired .
many recognize them as good , but not on the level of the other books of the bible .
anglicanism says that the apocrypha worthy of being " read for example of life " but not to be used " to establish any doctrine . "
books in both the hebrew and the greek are accepted by all denominations , and by jews , these are the protocanonical books .
catholics and orthodox also accept those books in manuscripts of the septuagint , an ancient greek translation of the old testament with great currency among the jews of the world , with the coda that catholics consider 3 esdras and 3 maccabees apocryphal .
most quotations of the old testament in the new testament , different by varying degrees from the text , are taken from the septuagint .
the unanimous consensus of modernainable scholars consider several other books , including 1 maccabees and judith , to have been written in hebrew or aramaic .
the letter of jeremiah , the wisdom of solomon , and 2 maccabees are originally greek compositions .
the table uses the names of the bible , including the new american revised version , the revised standard version , and the english standard version .
for the catholic canon , the douaic titles are given in parentheses when these are different from those editions .
likewise , the king james version references some of these books by the traditional spelling when referring to them in the new testament , such as " esaias " representing isaiah .
catholics , following the canon of trentology 1546 mirza , describe these books as deuterocanonical , while greek orthodox christians , following the synod of jerusalemsitor optional , use the traditional name of " anagignoskomena " , meaning " that which is to be read .
the protestant version of the bible included some of these books , as did the english 1611 king james version .
several of the books in the eastern orthodox canon are also found in the appendix to the latin vulgate , formerly the official bible of the roman catholic church .
the book order is the same in the greek orthodox , roman catholic , and protestant traditions .