the miocene is the first geological epoch of the neogene period .
as the earth went from the oligocene through the miocene and into the pliocene , the climate slowly cooled towards a series of ice ages .
the miocene boundaries are not set aside a single global event .
the apes first appeared , and diversified during the early miocene .
the plants and animals of the miocene were modern .
the miocene is of particular interest to geologists and palaeoclimatologists as major phases of the geology of the himalaya occurred during the miocene , affecting monsoonal patterns in asia , which were interlinked with glacial periods in the northern hemisphere .
of the modern geologic features , only the land bridge between south america and north america was absent .
the tethys seaway continued to shrink and then disappeared as africa collided with eurasia in the turkish – arabian region between 19 and 12 million years ago .
the subsequent uplift of mountains in the western mediterranean region and a global fall in sea levels combined to cause a temporary drying up of the mediterranean sea strata known as the messinian salinity crisis coined near the end of the miocene .
uplift of east africa in the late miocene was partly responsible for the shrinking of tropical rain forests in that region .
during the oligocene and early miocene the coast of northern brazil , colombia , south-central peru , central chile and large swathes of inland patagonia were subject to a marinession .
the steadily rising central part of the andes is an exception .
the antarctic plate began to subduct beneath south america 14 million years ago in the miocene , forming the chile triple junction .
at first the antarctic plate subducted in the southernmost tip of patagonia , meaning that the chile triple junction was near the strait of magellan .
as the southern part of nazca plate and the chile rise became consumed by subduction the more northerly regions of the antarctic plate begun to subduct beneath patagonia so that the chile triple junction advanced to the north over time .
as the southern andes rose in the middle miocene epochs 14 – 12 million years ago .
there is evidence of a warm period during the miocene .
the warming began 21 million years ago and lasted until 14 million years ago .
by 8 million years ago , temperatures dropped sharply once again , and the antarctic ice sheet was already approaching its present-day size and thickness .
greenland may have large glaciers as early as 7 to 8 million years ago .
during the miocene epoch was mostly supported by the two newly formed biomes , kelp forests and grasslands .
the higher organic content and water retention of the deeper and richer grassland soils , with long-term burial of carbon in sediments , produced a carbon and water vapor sink .
c grasses , which are able to assimilate carbon dioxide and water more efficiently than c grasses , expanded to become ecologically significant near the end of the miocene between 6 and 7 million years ago .
the expansion of grasslands and radiations between terrestrial herbivores is the same as fluctuations in co .
cycads between 11.5 and 5 million years ago began to rediversify after previous declines in variety due to climatic changes .
eucalyptus fossil leaves occur in the miocene of new zealand , where the genus is not native today , but have been introduced from australia .
