fermions include all quarks and leptons , as well as all composite particles made of an odd number of these , such as all baryons and many atoms and nuclei .
a fermion can be an elementary particle , such as the electron , or it can be a composite particle , such as the proton .
particles with half-integer spin are bosons .
if multiple fermions have the same spatial probability distribution , then at least one property of each fermion , such as its spin , must be different .
bosons are usually made of matter , although in the current state of particle physics the difference is unclear .
fermions , such as protons and neutrons , are the main building blocks of everyday matter .
the standard model recognizes two types of elementary fermions : quarks and leptons .
fermions come in three types : most standard model fermions are believed to be dirac fermions .
dirac fermions can be treated as a combination of two weyl fermions .
a particle with an odd number of fermions is called a fermion .
fermionic or bosonic behavior of a composite particle performs at large intervals compared to size of the system .
this is the origin of superconductivity and the superfluidity of helium-3 : in superconducting materials , electrons interact through the exchange of phonons , forming cooper pairs , while in helium-3 , cooper pairs are formed by spin fluctuations .
the quasiparticles of the fractional quantum hall effect are also known as composite fermions .
in a quantum field theory , there can be a field of bosons which are twisted .
they can be fermionic even if all the particles are bosons .
the original nonlinear sigma model describes the large distance behavior of pions .
in skyrme 's model , the proton and neutron are fermionic topological solitons of the pion field .
whereas skyrme 's example involved pion physics , there is a much more familiar example in quantum electrodynamics with a magnetic monopole .
a bosonic monopole with the smallest possible magnetic charge and a bosonic version of the electron will form a fermionic dyon .
the analogy between the skyrme field and the higgs field of the electroweak sector has been proposed to suggest that all fermions are skyrmions .