it is a perennial , although it is often grown as an annual in colder climates .
it likes a hot , relatively dry climate , but does well in other places .
many different kinds of oregano have been developed for use in many different ways .
it is not considered the best for culinary use , with a taste less remarkable and pungent .
it can pollinate other more sophisticated strains , but the offspring are rarely better in quality .
a closely related plant is marjoram from turkey .
they are prized for their flavor and compatibility with various recipes and sauces .
oregano is a culinary herb .
good-quality oregano may be strong enough to almost numb the tongue , but cultivars adapted to colder climates may have a lesser flavor .
climate , season , and soil composition may affect the aromatic oils present .
oregano is used as a staple herb of italian cuisine .
soldiers who returned from world war ii brought back with them a taste for the " pizza herb " .
it is less commonly used in the north of the country .
it is used in food from the mediterranean , the philippines , and latin america .
it is used for flavoring meat , especially for mutton and lamb .
the dried and ground leaves are most often used in greece to add to greek salad .
oregano has been used in folk medicine for many years .
oregano essential oil is extracted from the leaves of the oregano plant .
although oregano or its oil may be used as a dietary supplement , there is no evidence to show that it has any effect on human health .
in 2014 , the us food and drug administration abstracts said that its herbal products , including oregano essential oil , were being promoted to have numerous unproven anti-disease effects .
similar fda warning letters for false advertising and unproven health claims about oregano essential oil products were published in 2017 and 2018 .
the essential oil of oregano is composed mainly of monoterpenoids and monoterpenes .
over 60 different compounds have been identified , with the primary ones being carvacrol and thymol ranging to over 80 % , while lesser abundant compounds include p-cymene , γ-terpinene , caryophyllene , spathulenol , germacrene-d , β-fenchyl alcohol and δ-terolpine .
drying of the plant material affects both quantity and distribution of volatile compounds .
a sample of fresh plant material found to contain 33 g / kg dry weight iii . 1 g / kg wetriam decreased to below a third after warm-air convection drying .
much higher concentrations of volatile compounds are achieved towards the end of the growing season .
