world war ii lasted from 1939 to 1945 .
the vast majority of the world 's countries eventually formed two opposing military alliances : the allies and the axis .
a state of total war emerged , with more than 100 million people from over 30 countries .
the major participants threw their entire economic , industrial , and scientific capabilities behind the war effort .
world war ii was the deadliest conflict in human history .
it included massacres , the genocide of the holocaust , strategic bombing , starvation and disease , and the only use of nuclear weapons in war .
world war ii began on september 1,1939 , with the invasion of poland by germany and the subsequent declaration of war on germany by france and the united kingdom .
from late 1939 to early 1941 , in a series of campaigns and treaties , germany conquered or controlled much of continental europe , and formed the axis alliance with italy and japan .
under the molotov – ribbentrop pact of august 1939 , germany and the soviet union took over territories of poland , finland , romania and the baltic states .
after the fall of 1940 , france took over control of the axis powers .
war in the balkans , the aerial battle of britain , the blitz , and the long battle of the atlantic followed .
in june 1941 , the european axis powers invaded the soviet union .
this eastern front trapped the axis , most crucially the german wehrmacht , in a war of attrition .
in december 1941 , japan attacked the united states and the pacific .
after the u . s . declaration of war against japan , the european axis powers quickly declared war on the u . s . in solidarity with their japanese ally .
rapid japanese conquests over much of the western pacific caused by many in asia as liberation from western dominance .
the axis advance in the pacific stopped in 1942 when japan lost the important battle of midway .
key setbacks in 1943 , which included a series of german defeats on the eastern front , the allied invasions of sicily and italy , and allied victories in the pacific , cost the axis its retreat on all fronts .
in 1944 , the western allies invaded france .
during 1944 and 1945 the japanese suffered major reverses in mainland asia , in central china , burma and the allies .
the war ended with an invasion of germany by the western allies and the soviet union .
after the potsdam declaration by the allies on july 26,1945 , the united states dropped atomic bombs on the japanese cities of hiroshima and nagasaki , hiroshima , and nagasaki , respectively .
japan announced its intention to surrender on 15 august 1945 .
tribunals were set up by the allies and war crimes trials were held in the wake of the war both against the germans and the japanese .
world war ii changed the way the earth was going to look like the earth .
the united nations jemaamental universited and the united nations jemaat was established to foster international cooperation and prevent future conflicts .
the soviet union and the united states became rival superpowers .
after europe 's great powers declined , the influence of its great powers declined .
most of the countries whose industries had been damaged moved towards economic recovery and expansion .
this was to end pre-war enmities and create a common identity .
the start of the war in europe is generally held to be 1 september 1939 , beginning with the german invasion of poland ; the uk and france declared war on germany two days later .
the dates for the beginning of war in the pacific include the start of the second sino-japanese war on july 7,1937 , or even the japanese invasion of manchuria on 19 september 1931 .
the two wars joined in 1941 .
this article uses the conventional dating .
other starting dates sometimes used for world war ii include the italian invasion of abyssinia on 3 october 1935 .
the british historian antony beevor views the beginning of world war ii as the battles of khalkhin gol fought between japan and the forces of mongolia and the soviet union from may to september 1939 .
the exact date of the war 's end is not always agreed upon .
japan ended with the armistice on 2 september 1945 .
japan signed a peace treaty with the united states in 1951 .
a treaty regarding germany 's future allowed the reunification of east and west germany to take place in 1990 .
japan and the soviet union signed a treaty between japan and the soviet union .
world war i had radically changed the political map of europe , with the defeat of the central powers — including austria-hungary , germany , bulgaria and the ottoman empire — and the 1917 bolshevik seizure of power in russia , which eventually led to the founding of the soviet union .
new states were created out of the collapse of austria-hungary and the ottoman empire .
the league of nations was created during the 1919 paris peace conference .
its main goals were to prevent armed conflict through collective security , military and naval disarmament .
despite strong pacifist sentiment after world war i , its aftermath still caused irredentist and revanchist nationalism in several european states .
these sentiments were especially marked in germany because of the territorial , colonial , and financial losses caused by the treaty of versailles .
under the treaty , germany lost about 13 % of its home territory and all of its overseas possessions .
the german empire was dissolved in the german revolution of 1918 – 1919 .
the interwar period saw fighting between supporters of the new republic and hardline opponents on both the right and left .
italy , as an allies , had made some post-war territorial gains .
from 1922 to 1925 , the fascist movement led by benito mussolini seized power in italy with a nationalist , totalitarian , and class collaborationist agenda .
adolf hitler was the chancellor of germany in 1933 .
he abolished democracy and began a massive rearmament campaign .
france , to secure its alliance , allowed italy a free hand in ethiopia , which italy wanted to be a colonial territory .
in 1935 , the saar basin was reunited with germany and hitler repudiated the treaty of versailles .
the united kingdom , france and italy formed the stresa front in april 1935 to contain germany .
the soviet union , concerned by germany 's goals of capturing vast areas of eastern europe , drafted a treaty of mutual assistance with france .
the franco-soviet pact was needed to go through the bureaucracy of the league of nations .
the united states was concerned with the neutrality act of the same year .
in march 1936 , hitler sent the army to rhineland .
in october 1936 , germany and italy formed the axis powers .
a month later , germany and japan signed the anti-comintern pact , which italy would join in the following year .
the kuomintangsburg party in china started a unification campaign against regional warlords and nominally unified china in the mid-1920s .
in 1931 , an increasingly militaristic empire of japan , which had long sought influence in china as the first step of what its government saw as the country 's right to rule asia , used the mukden incident as a reason to launch an invasion of manchuria and establish the puppet state of manchukuo .
china wanted to stop the japanese invasion of manchuria .
japan withdrew from the league of nations after being condemned for fighting in manchuria .
the tanggu truce was signed in 1933 .
after this , chinese volunteer forces continued the fight against japanese aggression in manchuria , and chahar and suiyuan .
after the 1936 xi ' an incident , the kuomintang and communist forces agreed on a ceasefire to fight against japan .
the second italo – ethiopian war was a brief colonial war that began in october 1935 and ended in may 1936 .
the war began with the invasion of the ethiopian empire erie erie erie erie erie erie ashore by the armed forces of italy percival " regno d ' italia " .
the war also exposed the weakness of the league of nations as a force to preserve peace .
italy and ethiopia were member nations , but the league did little when the league was clearly violated article x of the league 's covenant .
the united kingdom and france supported sanctions on italy for the invasion , but they were not fully enforced and failed to end the italian invasion .
italy dropped its objections to germany 's goal of taking over austria .
when the civil war started in spain , hitler and mussolini lent military support to the nationalist rebels , led by francisco franco .
mussolini sent to spain more than 70,000 ground troops and 6,000 aircraft .
the soviet union supported the existing government , the spanish republic .
over 30,000 foreign volunteers , known as the international brigades , also fought against the nationalists .
both germany and the soviet union used this proxy war to test in combat their most advanced weapons and tactics .
the nationalists won the civil war in april 1939 .
his greatest collaboration with germany was the sending of volunteers to fight on the eastern front .
in july 1937 , japan captured the former chinese imperial capital of peking after instigating the marco polo bridge incident .
the soviets quickly signed a non-aggression pact with china to help with the soviet union .
from september to november , the japanese attacked taiyuan .
after three months of fighting , shanghai fell .
the japanese continued to push the chinese forces back , capturing the capital in december 1937 .
after the fall of nanking , tens of thousands of chinese civilians and disarmed combatants were murdered by the japanese .
in march 1938 , the chinese won their first major victory at taierzhuang .
in june 1938 , chinese forces stalled the japanese advance by flooding the yellow river .
the chinese government moved inland to chongqing and continued the war .
in the mid-to-late 1930s , japanese forces in manchukuo had sporadic border clashes with the soviet union and mongolia .
the japanese doctrine of hokushin-ron , which emphasised japan 's expansion northward , was favoured by the imperial army during this time .
with the defeat of the japanese at khalkin gol in 1939 , the ongoing second sino-japanese war and ally nazi germany pursuing neutrality with the soviets , this policy would prove difficult to maintain .
japan and the soviet union signed a neutrality pact in april 1941 .
in europe , germany and italy were becoming more aggressive .
in march 1938 , germany took over austria , again provoking little reaction from other european powers .
encouraged , hitler began pressing german claims on the sudetenland , an area of czechoslovakia with a predominantly ethnic german population .
soon the united kingdom and france followed the counsel of british prime minister neville chamberlain .
soon after , germany and italy forced czechoslovakia to give more territory to hungary .
although all of germany 's demands had been satisfied by the agreement , hitler was furious that british interference prevented him from seizing all of czechoslovakia in one operation .
in january 1939 , hitler secretly ordered a big build-up of the german navy to challenge british naval supremacy .
in march 1939 , germany invaded czechoslovakia and later split it into the german protectorate of bohemia and moravia and a pro-german client state , the slovak republic .
hitler also told the klaipeda region to be given to lithuania .
when italy conquered albania in april 1939 , the same guarantee was extended to romania and greece .
shortly after the franco-british promised to poland , germany and italy to make their own alliance with the pact of steel .
hitler accused the united kingdom and poland of trying to " encircle " germany and renounced the anglo-german naval agreement and the german – polish non-aggression pact .
the situation reached a general crisis in late august as german troops continued to move against the polish border .
in august 23 , the united kingdom and france were going to be in control of the axis countries .
the pact was a secret protocol that defined german and soviet " spheres of influence " .
the pact neutralized the possibility of soviet opposition to a campaign against poland .
in response to the requests for direct negotiations to avoid war , germany made demands on poland , which only helped worsen relations .
on 29 august , hitler demanded that a polish plenipotentiary immediately travel to berlin to negotiate the handover of danzig .
the poles refused to comply with the german demands , and on the night of 30 – 31 august in a stormy meeting with the british ambassador neville henderson , ribbentrop declared that germany considered its claims rejected .
on september 1,1939 , germany invaded poland .
the battle of westerplatte is often described as the first battle of the war .
the uk said germany would stop military operations , and on 3 september , france , the united kingdom , australia , and new zealand declared war on germany .
this alliance was joined by south africatively 6 september ) and canada ( .
the alliance gave no military support to poland .
the western allies also began a blockade of germany .
germany ordered u-boat warfare against allied merchant and warships .
on 8 september , german troops reached the suburbs of warsaw .
the polish attack to the west stopped the german advance for several days , but it was outflanked and encircled by the wehrmacht .
remnants of the polish army moved through to besieged warsaw .
on 17 september 1939 , after signing a cease-fire with japan , the soviets invaded eastern poland .
on 27 september , the warsaw garrison surrendered to the germans .
despite the military defeat , poland never surrendered .
many of them would fight against the axis in other theatres of the war .
germany took over the western part of poland , and the soviet union took its eastern part .
on 6 october , hitler made a public peace overture to the united kingdom and france , but said that poland was to be determined by germany and the soviet union .
hitler ordered an immediate attack against france .
the soviet union forced the baltic countries to sign the " mutual assistance pacts " that said soviet troops in these countries .
soon after , significant soviet military groups were moved there .
finland refused to sign a similar pact .
the soviet union invaded finland in november 1939 .
the finno-soviet war ended in march 1940 with little finnish concessions .
in june 1940 , the soviet union forced estonia , latvia and lithuania to take over the region .
meanwhile , the nazi-soviet political rapprochement and economic co-operation slowly stalled , and both states began planning for war .
in april 1940 , germany invaded denmark and norway .
denmark capitulated after a few hours , and norway was captured within two months despite allied support .
winston churchill became prime minister on 10 may 1940 .
germany launched an attack against france .
to circumvent the strong maginot line fortifications on the franco-german border , germany directed its attack at the neutral nations of belgium , the netherlands , and luxembourg .
the germans did a flanking manoeuvre through the ardennes region .
by successfully implementing new blitzkrieg tactics , the " wehrmacht " quickly advanced to the channel and cut off the allied forces in belgium .
the united kingdom was able to evacuate a significant number of allied troops from the continent by early june .
on june 10 , italy invaded france , declaring war on france and the united kingdom .
the germans turned south against the weakened french army , and paris fell to them on 14june .
eight days later , france signed an armistice with germany .
france kept its fleet , which the united kingdom attacked on 3july .
the battle of britain began in early july with the " luftwaffe " attacks on shipping and harbours .
the united kingdom rejected hitler 's ultimatum , and the german air superiority campaign started in august but failed to defeat raf fighter command .
the invasion of britain was postponed indefinitely on 17september .
the german strategic bombing attack intensified with night attacks on london and other cities in the blitz .
using newly captured french ports , the german navy enjoyed success against an over-extended royal navy .
the british home fleet sunk the german battleship " bismarck " .
in november 1939 , the united states was taking measures to help china and the western allies .
in 1940 , the size of the united states navy was significantly increased .
in september , the united states agreed to a trade of american destroyers for british bases .
many of the americans continued to oppose any military intervention in the conflict well into 1941 .
in december 1940 , roosevelt accused hitler of planning world conquest and ruled out any negotiations as useless , calling for the united states to become an " arsenal of democracy " and promoted lend-lease programmes of aid to support the british war effort .
the united states started planning to attack against germany .
the axis powers were formally united japan , italy , and germany .
the tripartite pact said that any country , with the exception of the soviet union , which attacked any axis power would be forced to go to war against all three .
the axis expanded in november 1940 when hungary , slovakia and romania joined .
romania and hungary would make major contributions to the axis war against the soviet union , in romania 's case partially to recapture territory given to the soviet union .
in early june 1940 the italian " regia aeronautica " attacked malta .
in late summer through early autumn italy conquered british somaliland and made an incursion into british-held egypt .
in october italy attacked greece , but the attack was repulsed with heavy italian casualties ; the campaign ended within days with minor territorial changes .
germany started preparing for an invasion of the balkans to help italy .
in december 1940 , british empire forces began to attack italian forces in egypt and italy .
by early february 1941 italy had lost control of eastern libya .
the italian navy also suffered major defeats , with the royal navy putting three italian battleships out of commission by a carrier attack at taranto .
at the end of march 1941 , rommel 's afrika korps attacked the commonwealth forces .
in under a month , the axis forces advanced to western egypt and besieged the port of tobruk .
by march 1941 bulgaria and yugoslavia signed the tripartite pact .
the government of the yugoslav republic was overthrown two days later by pro-british nationalists .
germany invaded yugoslavia and greece on 6 april 1941 .
the invasion of the greek island of crete at the end of may completed the german conquest of the balkans .
although the axis victory was swift , bitter and large-scale partisan warfare started against the axis occupation of yugoslavia , which continued until the end of the war .
in may commonwealth forces quashed an uprising in iraq which had been supported by german aircraft from bases within vichy-controlled syria .
between june and july , they invaded syria and lebanon .
with the problems in europe and asia , germany , japan , and the soviet union made preparations .
with the soviets worried about getting tensions with germany and the japanese planning to take advantage of the european war by seizing resource-rich european possessions in southeast asia , the two powers signed the soviet – japanese neutrality pact in april 1941 .
the germans were preparing an attack on the soviet union , massing forces on the soviet border .
hitler believed that the united kingdom did not want to end the war .
he decided to try to strengthen germany 's relations with the soviets , or failing to attack and eliminate them .
in november 1940 , the soviet union agreed to decide if the soviet union would join the tripartite pact .
the soviets showed some interest , but asked for concessions from finland , bulgaria , turkey , and japan that germany considered unacceptable .
on 18 december 1940 , hitler issued the directive directive to prepare for an invasion of the soviet union .
on 22 june 1941 , germany , supported by italy and romania , invaded the soviet union in operation barbarossa .
finland and hungary joined the country .
the main targets of this surprise attack were the baltic region , moscow and ukraine .
hitler 's goals were to eliminate the soviet union as a military power , exterminate communism , generate " lebensraum " legally " living space " .
although the red army was preparing for strategic counter-attacks before the war , " barbarossa " forced the soviet supreme command to use a strategic defense .
during the summer , the axis made gains into soviet territory .
by the middle of august , the german army high command decided to stop the attack of a considerably depleted army group centre .
the kiev offensive was very successful , resulting in encirclement and elimination of four soviet armies , and made possible further advance into crimea and industrially developed eastern ukraine .
the diversion of three quarters of axis troops and the majority of their air forces from france and the central mediterranean to the eastern front prompted the united kingdom to reconsider its grand strategy .
in july , the uk and the soviet union formed a military alliance against germany and the soviets invaded iran to secure the persian corridor and iran 's oil fields .
in august , the united kingdom and the united states agreed to the atlantic charter .
by october axis goals in ukraine and the baltic region were achieved .
after two months of violent battles in increasingly harsh weather the german army almost reached the outer suburbs of moscow , where the exhausted troops were stopped .
the soviet union retained a considerable part of its military potential .
the war ended in the end of the war .
by early december , the soviets had more soldiers than the axis troops .
this , as well as intelligence data , was enough to stop any attack by the japanese kwantung army , allowed the soviets to begin a massive attack on 5 december all along the front and pushed german troops 100-west .
japan became subject to increasing economic pressure .
japan launched its first attack against changsha , a chinese city .
the war between china and japan was stalemated by 1940 .
japan invaded and occupied northern indochina .
afterwards , the united states embargoed iron , steel and mechanical parts against japan .
chinese nationalist forces launched a large-scale attack in early 1940 .
in august , chinese communists launched an attack in central china .
continued antipathy between chinese communist and nationalist forces , and armed fights in january 1941 , effectively ending their co-operation .
in march , the japanese 11th army attacked the headquarters of the chinese 19th army .
in september , japan tried to take the city of changsha again and clashed with chinese nationalist forces .
german successes in europe encouraged japan to pressure on european governments in southeast asia .
the dutch government agreed to provide japan some oil supplies from the dutch east indies .
in july 1941 japan sent troops to southern indochina .
the united states reacted by placing a freeze on japanese assets and a total oil embargo .
japan was planning an invasion of the soviet far east , ending the german invasion in the west , but abandoned the operation after the sanctions .
since early 1941 the united states and japan had been negotiations in an attempt to improve their strained relations and end the war in china .
during these negotiations japan advanced a number of proposals which were dismissed by the americans as inadequate .
at the same time the united states , the united kingdom , and the netherlands were in secret discussions for the joint defense of their territories .
roosevelt reinforced the philippines antilles protectorate scheduled for independence in 1946 .
japan was not happy because of the lack of progress .
on 20 november , hideki tojo gave a temporary proposal as its final offer .
it also wanted the end of american aid to china .
in exchange , japan promised not to launch any attacks in southeast asia and to withdraw its forces from southern indochina .
japan had to evacuate all of china without conditions .
japan was essentially forced to choose between abandoning its ambitions in china , or seizing the natural resources it needed in the dutch east indies by force .
japan planned to capture european colonies in asia to create a big defensive area stretching into the central pacific .
the japanese would then be free to exploit the resources of southeast asia while exhausting the over-stretched allies by fighting a defensive war .
to prevent american intervention while getting in the perimeter , it was planned to destroy the united states pacific fleet and the american military in the philippines from the outset .
on 7 december 1941 japan attacked british and american holdings with near-simultaneous attacks against southeast asia and the central pacific .
these included an attack on the american fleets at pearl harbor and the philippines , landings in thailand and malaya , and the battle of hong kong .
the attacks led the united states , united kingdom , china , australia and several other states to declare war on japan .
germany , followed by the other axis states , declared war on the united states in solidarity with japan .
on january 1,1942 , the allied big four — the soviet union , china , the united kingdom and the united states — and 22 smaller or exiled governments issued the declaration .
during 1942 , allied officials were debated about the plan .
all agreed that defeating germany was the main goal .
the americans favored a big attack on germany through france .
the soviets were also demanding a second front .
the british argued that military operations should target peripheral areas to wear out german strength .
germany itself had a lot of bombing .
an offensive against germany would then be launched by allied armour without using large armies .
eventually , the british convinced the americans that a landing in france was infeasible in 1942 .
at the casablanca conference in early 1943 , the allies repeated the statements issued in the 1942 declaration , and demanded the unconditional surrender of their enemies .
the british and americans agreed to continue to press the initiative in the mediterranean by invading sicily to secure the mediterranean supply routes .
the british argued for further operations in the balkans to bring turkey into the war .
by april 1942 , japan and its allies had almost fully captured burma , malaya , the dutch east indies , singapore , and rabaul , inflicting severe losses on allied troops and taking a large number of prisoners .
despite stubborn resistance by filipino and us forces , the philippine commonwealth was eventually captured in may 1942 , forcing its government into exile .
on 16 april , in burma , 7,000 british soldiers were captured by the japanese 33rd division during the battle of yenangyaung and rescued by the chinese 38th division .
japanese forces also achieved naval victories in the south china sea , java sea and indian ocean , and bombed the allied naval base at darwin , australia .
in january 1942 , the only allied success against japan was a chinese victory at changsha .
these easy victories over unprepared us and european opponents left japan overconfident , as well as overextended .
in early may 1942 , japan attacked port moresby by amphibious assault .
the invasion was ended when an allied force , based on two american fleet carriers , fought japanese naval forces to a draw in the battle of the coral sea .
japan 's next plan was to capture midway atoll and capture american carriers .
japan started the zhejiang-jiangxi campaign in mid-may .
in early june , japan put its attacks into action , but the americans were fully aware of the plans and order of battle .
japan decided to capture port moresby by an overland campaign in papua .
the americans planned a attack against japanese positions in the southern solomon islands .
both plans started in july , but by mid-september , the battle for guadalcanal took priority for the japanese .
guadalcanal soon became a big point for both sides with heavy commitments of troops and ships in the battle for guadalcanal .
by the start of 1943 , the japanese were defeated on the island and withdrew their troops .
in burma , the commonwealth forces had two operations .
the first , an offensive into the arakan region in late 1942 , went disastrously , forcing a retreat back to india by may 1943 .
by the end of april , the japanese forces had achieved mixed results .
despite considerable losses , in early 1942 germany and its allies stopped a major soviet attack in central and southern russia , keeping most territorial gains they had achieved during the previous year .
in may the germans defeated soviet attacks in the kerch peninsula and at kharkov , and then launched their main summer offensive against southern russia in june 1942 , to capture the oil fields of the caucasus and occupy kuban steppe , while maintaining positions on the northern and central areas of the front .
the germans split army group south into two groups : army group a advanced to the lower don river and struck south-east to the caucasus , while army group b headed towards the volga river .
the soviets decided to defend stalingrad .
by mid-november , the germans had nearly taken stalingrad in bitter street fighting .
the soviets began their second winter counter-offensive , starting with an encirclement of german forces at stalingrad .
by early february 1943 , the german army had taken tremendous losses .
in february , after the soviet push had tapered off , the germans attacked kharkov .
the german navy ravaged allied shipping off the american atlantic coast .
by november 1941 , commonwealth forces launched a counter-attack in north africa .
in north africa , the germans attacked the british back to positions at the gazala line by early february .
the japanese might use bases in vichy-held madagascar caused the british to invade the island in early may 1942 .
an axis attack in libya forced an allied retreat deep inside egypt until axis forces were stopped at el alamein .
on the continent , raids of allied commandos on strategic targets , culminating in the disastrous dieppe raid , showed the western allies ' inability to launch an invasion of continental europe without much better preparation , equipment , and operational security .
in august 1942 , the allies succeeded in repelling a second attack against el alamein .
a few months later , the allies began an attack of their own in egypt .
this was followed up shortly after by anglo-american landings in french north africa .
hitler responded to the french colony 's defection by ordering the occupation of vichy france .
the axis forces in africa withdrew into tunisia .
in june 1943 the british and americans began a bombing campaign against germany .
the firebombing of hamburg was one of the first attacks in this campaign .
after the guadalcanal campaign , the allies started several attacks against japan in the pacific .
in may 1943 , canadian and us forces were sent to eliminate japanese forces from the aleutians .
soon after , the united states , with support from australian and new zealand forces , began major operations to capture surrounding islands .
by the end of march 1944 , the allies had destroyed most of the japanese base at truk in the caroline islands .
in april , the allies launched an attack to capture western new guinea .
in the soviet union , both the germans and the soviets spent the spring and early summer of 1943 preparing for large attacks in central russia .
on july 4,1943 , germany attacked soviet forces around kursk .
within a week , german forces had exhausted themselves against the soviets ' deeply echeloned and well-built defences .
this resulted in the arrest of mussolini in the same month .
on 12 july 1943 , the soviets launched their own attack .
the soviet victory at kursk marked the end of german superiority , giving the soviet union the initiative on the eastern front .
the germans tried to stabilise their eastern front , but the soviets broke through it at smolensk and by the lower dnieper attacks .
the allies invaded mainland italy in september 1943 .
germany with the help of fascists responded by disarming italian forces that were in many places without superior orders , seizing military control of italian areas , and creating a series of defensive lines .
german special forces then rescued mussolini , who then soon established a new client state in german-occupied italy named the italian social republic , causing an italian civil war .
the western allies fought through several lines until reaching the main german defensive line in mid-november .
german operations in the atlantic also had many attacks .
by may 1943 , the allied counter-measures became more effective .
in november 1943 , franklin d . roosevelt and winston churchill met with chiang kai-shek in cairo and then with joseph stalin in tehran .
the treaty was to decide the defeat of japan in three months after world war ii .
in 1943 , during the seven-week battle of changde , the chinese forced japan to fight a costly war of attrition .
in january 1944 , the allies launched a series of attacks in italy against the line at monte cassino .
on 27 january 1944 , the soviet troops launched a major attack that expelled german forces from the leningrad region .
the following soviet attacks were halted on the estonian border by the german army group north .
this slowed the soviets to attack the baltic sea .
by may 1944 , the soviets had liberated crimea .
the allied attacks in italy had succeeded .
the allies had success in mainland asia .
in march 1944 , the japanese launched the first of two invasions .
in may 1944 , british forces drove japanese troops back to burma by july .
the second japanese invasion of china aimed to destroy china 's main fighting forces , secure railways between japanese-held territory and capture allied airfields .
by june , the japanese had conquered the province of henan and started a new attack on changsha in hunan province .
on 6 june 1944 1944 1944 excavated , after three years of soviet pressure , the western allies invaded france .
after reassigning several allied divisions from italy , they also attacked southern france .
these landings were successful .
paris was liberated on 25 august by the free french forces , led by general charles de gaulle , and the western allies continued to push back german forces in western europe during the latter part of the year .
an attempt to advance into northern germany led by a major airborne operation in the netherlands failed .
after that , the western allies slowly moved into germany , but failed to cross the ruhr river in a large attack .
in italy , the allies also slowed down the last major german defensive line .
on 22 june , the soviets launched a strategic attack in belarus belarus belarus belarus belarus percival " operation bagration " foley that destroyed the german army group centre almost completely .
soon after , another soviet attack forced german troops from western ukraine and eastern poland .
the soviets formed the polish committee of national liberation to control territory in poland and combat the polish armia krajowa ; the soviet red army remained in the praga district on the other side of the vistula and watched passively as the germans quelled the warsaw uprising initiated by the armia krajowa .
the national uprising in slovakia was also stopped by the germans .
the soviet red army 's strategic attack in eastern romania cut off and destroyed the german troops there .
in september 1944 , soviet troops moved into yugoslavia .
by this point , the communist-led partisans under marshal josip broz tito controlled much of the territory of yugoslavia .
in northern serbia , the soviet red army , with limited support from bulgarian forces , assisted the partisans in a joint liberation of the capital city of belgrade on 20 october .
a few days later , the soviets launched a massive attack against german-occupied hungary .
unlike impressive soviet victories in the balkans , the germans did not let the soviets enter finland .
by july 1944 , commonwealth forces in southeast asia had repelled the japanese sieges in assam .
in september 1944 , chinese forces captured mount song and reopened the burma road .
in china , the japanese had more successes .
soon after , they invaded the province of guangxi .
in the pacific , us forces continued to press back the japanese line .
in mid-june 1944 , they began their attack against the mariana and palau islands .
these defeats led to the resignation of the japanese prime minister , hideki tojo , and provided the united states with air bases to launch heavy bomber attacks on the japanese home islands .
soon after , allied naval forces scored a victory in the battle of leyte gulf , one of the largest naval battles in history .
on 16 december 1944 , germany tried to capture the western front .
by january , the attack had been stopped with no strategic goals .
in italy , the western allies remained stalemated at the german defensive line .
in mid-january 1945 , the soviets and poles attacked in poland .
on 4 february , the soviet union met for the yalta conference .
they agreed on the occupation of post-war germany .
in february , the soviets entered silesia and pomerania , while western allies entered western germany and closed to the rhine river .
by march , the western allies crossed the rhine north and south of the ruhr .
in early march , the german troops tried to protect its last oil reserves in hungary and to capture budapest , germany attacked soviet troops near lake balaton .
in two weeks , the attack had been stopped , the soviets advanced to vienna , and captured the city .
in early april , soviet troops captured konigsberg .
the allies met at the elbe river on april 25,1945 .
the soviet union attacked and captured berlin in late april .
in italy , the germans surrendered on 29 april .
on 30 april , the reichstag surrendered .
there were several changes in leadership during this period .
on 12 april , president roosevelt died .
benito mussolini was killed by italian partisans on 28 april 1945 .
hitler committed suicide in berlin , and was succeeded by grand admiral karl donitz .
the united nations signed the 7 and 8 may to be effective by the end of 8 may .
german army group centre resisted in prague until 11 may .
in the pacific , american forces moved in the philippines .
they landed on luzon in january 1945 and captured manila in march .
fighting continued on luzon , mindanao , and other islands of the philippines until the end of the war .
the united states army air forces launched a massive firebombing campaign of strategic cities in japan in order to destroy japanese war industry and civilian morale .
a bombing raid on tokyo of 9-10 march was the deadliest conventional bombing raid in history .
in may 1945 , australian troops landed in borneo .
british , american , and chinese forces defeated the japanese in northern burma in march .
chinese forces started a counterattack in the battle of west hunan that occurred between 6 april and 7 june 1945 .
the american forces moved towards japan by march and okinawa by june .
at the same time , american submarines cut off japanese imports .
on july 11 , allied leaders met in potsdam , germany .
they confirmed earlier agreements about germany , and the american , british and chinese governments said that the demand for unconditional surrender of japan , specifically stating that " the alternative for japan is prompt and utter destruction " .
during this conference , the united kingdom held its general election , and clement attlee replaced churchill as prime minister .
the japanese government thought it would be able to negotiating for more favourable surrender terms .
in august , the united states dropped atomic bombs on the japanese cities of hiroshima and nagasaki .
between the two bombings , the soviets invaded japanese-held manchuria and quickly defeated the kwantung army .
the red army also captured the southern part of sakhalin island and the kuril islands .
japan surrendered on august 15,1945 , ending the war .
the allies managed to occupy austria and germany .
the former became a neutral state , non-aligned with any political bloc .
the western and eastern occupation zones controlled by the western allies and the soviet union .
the nazis took away the nazis from power , but this policy moved towards amnesty and re-integration of ex-nazis into west german society .
germany lost a quarter of its pre-war jemison -lrb- 1937 – 1937 -rrb- territory .
silesia , neumark and most of pomerania were taken over by poland , and east prussia was divided between poland and the soviet union , followed by the expulsion to germany of the nine million germans from these provinces , as well as three million germans from the sudetenland in czechoslovakia .
by the 1950s , one-fifth of west germans were refugees from the east .
the soviet union also took over the polish provinces east of the curzon line , from which 2 million poles were expelled .
the united nations was formed on october 24,1945 , to keep peace between countries .
the united kingdom , france , the soviet union , and the united states became permanent members of the un 's security council .
the five permanent members remain so to the present .
the western allies and the soviet union had begun to weaken .
germany had been divided , and two independent states , the federal republic of germany and the german democratic republic , were created within the borders of allied and soviet occupation zones .
the rest of europe was also divided into western and soviet spheres of influence .
eastern and central european countries fell into the soviet sphere .
as a result , east germany , poland , hungary , romania , czechoslovakia , and albania became soviet satellite states .
the soviet union had a fully independent policy .
the united states-led nato and the soviet-led warsaw pact were formed in the same year .
the long period of political tensions and military competition between them would be accompanied by an unprecedented arms race and proxy wars .
in asia , the united states occupied japan and occupied the western pacific .
korea was divided between the soviet union in the north and the united states in the south between 1945 and 1948 .
in 1948 , korea was independent from the 38th parallel .
in 1946 , the chinese government resumed the civil war .
the nationalist forces retreated to taiwan in 1949 .
in the middle east , the arab rejection of the united nations partition plan for palestine and the creation of israel marked the conflict between the arabs and israel .
this was a failure leading to decolonization .
the global economy suffered from the war .
the united states became richer than any other nation .
the uk and the united states went on a policy of industrial disarmament in western germany in the years 1945-1948 .
because of international trade , this led to european economic stagnation and delayed european recovery for several years .
the recovery of the currency in western germany was the start of the world trade ii plan .
the post-1948 west german recovery has been called the german economic miracle .
italy also experienced an economic boom and the french economy recovered .
by contrast , the united kingdom was in a state of economic ruin .
the soviet union , despite enormous human and material losses , also experienced rapid increase in production .
japan had incredibly quick economic growth , becoming one of the most powerful economies in the 1980s .
china returned to its pre-war industrial production by 1952 .
there are many deaths in the war .
most suggest that 60 million people died in the war , including about 20 million military personnel and 40 million civilians .
many of the civilians died because of genocide , mass-bombings , disease , and starvation .
the soviet union lost around 27 million people during the war , 8.7 million military and 19 million civilian deaths .
a quarter of the people in the soviet union were wounded or killed .
germany had 5.3 million military losses , mostly on the eastern front and during the final battles in germany .
of the total number of deaths in world war ii , approximately 85 % — mostly soviet and chinese — were on the allied side .
many of these deaths were caused by war crimes committed by german and japanese forces in occupied territories .
about 11 to 17 million civilians died as a direct or as an indirect result of nazi racist policies .
between 1941 and 1945 , over 200,000 ethnic serbs , along with gypsies and jews , were persecuted and murdered by axis axis aligned croatian ustase in yugoslavia .
also , over 100,000 poles were massacred by the ukrainian insurgent army in the volhynia massacres , between 1943 and 1945 .
about 10,000 ukrainians were killed by the polish home army and other polish units , in reprisal attacks .
in asia and the pacific , between 3 million and more than 10 million civilians , mostly chinesegraphs were killed by the japanese .
the most infamous japanese atrocity was the nanking massacre , in which fifty to three hundred thousand chinese civilians were murdered .
mitsuyoshi himeta reported that 2.7 million people died in the " sanko sakusen " .
general yasuji okamura implemented the policy in heipei and shantung .
axis forces used biological and chemical weapons .
the imperial japanese army used a variety of such weapons during its invasion and occupation of china foley " see unit 731 "arth and in early conflicts against the soviets .
both the germans and japanese tested such weapons against civilians , and sometimes on prisoners of war .
the soviet union was responsible for the katyn massacre of 22,000 polish officers , and the imprisonment or execution of thousands of political prisoners by the nkvd , along with mass civilian deportations to siberia , in the baltic states and eastern poland annexed by the red army .
the mass-bombing of cities in europe and asia has often been called a war crime .
the usaaf firebombed a total of 67 japanese cities , killing 393,000 civilians and destroying 65 % of buildings .
nazi germany was responsible for the holocaust making up approximately 6 million jews ; as well as for killing 2.7 million ethnic poles and 4 million others who were deemed " unworthy of life " .
soviet pows were kept in especially unbearable conditions , and 3.6 million soviet pows out of 5.7 died in nazi camps during the war .
death camps were also created in nazi germany to kill people at an industrial scale .
about 12 million europeans from german occupied countries were used as a work force in german industry , agriculture and war economy .
during wartime privation and hunger caused many deaths of inmates , including foreign citizens of poland and other countries occupied by the soviet union , as well as axis pows .
by the end of the war , most soviet pows liberated from nazi camps and many civilians were taken away from the nazis .
japanese prisoner-of-war camps , many of which were used as labour camps , also had high death rates .
the death rate of western prisoners was 27.1 per cent nedra for american pows , 37 % bronze medals , seven times that of prisoners under germans and italians .
37,583 prisoners from the uk , 28,500 from the netherlands , and 14,473 from the united states were released after the surrender of japan .
between 1935 and 1941 , about five million chinese civilians were slaves in the united states .
after 1942 , the number reached 10 million .
in java , between 4 and 10 million people were forced to work .
about 270,000 of these javanese labourers were sent to other japanese-held areas in south east asia , and only 52,000 were repatriated to java .
in europe , the occupation of the country came under two forms .
in western , northern , and central europe , denmark , the low countries , and the annexed portions of czechoslovakia czechoslovakianhead germany made economic policies .
the income from occupied nations was over 40 % of the total german income .
in the east , the gains of " lebensraum " were never attained as fluctuating front-lines and soviet scorched earth policies denied resources to the german invaders .
unlike in the west , the nazi racial policy encouraged extreme brutality against what it considered to be the " inferior people " of slavic descent .
although the resistance groups formed in most occupied territories , they did not have much german operations in either the east or the west until late 1943 .
in asia , japan termed nations under its occupation as being part of the greater east asia co-prosperity sphere .
although japanese forces were originally welcomed as liberators from european domination in some territories , their cruel actions turned local public opinion against them within weeks .
by 1943 , it was able to get production in the dutch east indies up to 76 % of its 1940 output rate .
before the war , the allies had a lot of advantages in both population and economics .
if colonies are included , it then gives the allies more than a 5 : 1 advantage in population and nearly 2 .
in asia at the same time , china had roughly six times the population of japan , but only an 89 % higher gdp .
the united states provided about two-thirds of all the ordnance used by the allies in terms of warships , transports , warplanes , artillery , tanks , trucks , and ammunition .
the allies ' economic and population advantages were largely mitigated during the initial rapid rapid blitzkrieg attacks of germany and japan .
the allies ' ability to out-produce the axis is often because they have more access to natural resources .
germany and japan did not plan to fight a long war .
to improve their production , germany and japan used millions of slave labourers ; germany used about 12 million people , mostly from eastern europe , while japan used more than 18 million people in far east asia .
planes were used for reconnaissance , as fighters , bombers , and ground-support .
the allies also made strategic bombing of enemy industrial and population centres to destroy the enemy 's ability to wage war ashore .
anti-aircraft weaponry also advanced , including defences such as radar and surface-to-air artillery .
the use of the jet aircraft was pioneered .
guided missiles were being developed , but they were not advanced enough to reliably target aircraft until some years after the war .
advances were made in nearly every aspect of naval warfare , most notably with aircraft carriers and submarines .
the coral sea established the carrier as the main capital ship in place of the battleship .
in the atlantic , escort carriers were a vital part of allied convoys .
carriers were also more economical than battleships because of the relatively low cost of aircraft and their not needing to be as heavily armoured .
submarines , which had proved to be effective weapons during the first world war , were anticipated by all sides to be important in the second .
the british focused development on anti-submarine weaponry and tactics , such as sonar and convoys , while germany focused on improving its attack capability , with designs such as the type vii submarine and wolfpack tactics .
gradually , improving allied technologies such as the leigh light , hedgehog , squid , and homing torpedoes proved victorious over the german submarines .
the germans had improved artillery to use the speed of both infantry and cavalry .
the tank was used mainly for infantry support in the first world war .
in the late 1930s , tank design was improved .
at the start of the war , most commanders thought that enemy tanks should be met by tanks with better specifications .
this idea was challenged by the poor performance of the tank guns against armour .
this was a successful tactickrieg tactics across poland and france .
many means of destroying tanks , including indirect artillery , anti-tank guns blew up both towed and self-propelled charlemagne , mines , short-ranged infantry antitank weapons , and other tanks were used .
even with large-scale mechanisation , infantry remained the backbone of all forces , and throughout the war , most infantry were equipped similarly to world war i .
the portable machine gun spread , a notable example being the german mg34 , and various submachine guns which were suited to close combat in urban and jungle settings .
the assault rifle was a standard postwar infantry weapon for most armed forces .
most of the major belligerents attempted to solve the problems of complexity and security .
the development of sigint galway " sig " nals " int " elligencegencegencegencegencedpor " and cryptanalysis enabled the countering process of decryption .
notable examples were the allied decryption of japanese naval codes and british ultra , a pioneering method for decoding enigma benefiting from information given to the united kingdom by the polish cipher bureau , which had been decoding early versions of enigma before the war .
another part of military intelligence was the use of deception , which the allies used to great effect , such as in operations mincemeat and bodyguard .
other technological and engineering feats achieved during the war include the world 's first programmable computersttered z3 , colossus , and eniaceux , guided missiles and modern rockets , the manhattan project 's development of nuclear weapons , operations research and the development of artificial harbours and oil pipelines under the english channel .
penicillin was first mass-produced and used during the war ttss .
