the title is a translation into german of the old norse phrase " " .
wagner 's account is very different from his old norse sources .
the three norns , daughters of erda , are spinning the rope of destiny .
the norns disappear into the earth , and lamenting their loss of wisdom .
siegfried and brunnhilde come out of their cave .
brunnhilde sends siegfried off to new adventures .
siegfried rides away as an orchestral interlude for siegfried to go to the rhine endings .
he tells gutrune that he has given her a potion that she can use to make siegfried forget brunnhilde and fall in love with gutrune .
gunther offers him the love potion .
siegfried toasts brunnhilde and their love .
he falls in love with gutrune .
siegfried offers to win a wife for gunther .
meanwhile , brunnhilde is visited by her valkyrie sister waltraute .
wotan is sad at losing his spear , as it has all the treaties and bargains he has made-everything that gives him power – carved into its shaft .
wotan ordered branches of the world tree , to be piled around valhalla ; sent his magic ravens to spy on the world and bring him news ; and waits in valhalla for the end .
the curse is now affecting their father , wotan .
siegfried arrives , disguised as gunther .
siegfried overpowers her , but takes the ring from her hand and puts it on his own .
when alberich tells him that he will kill siegfried and get the ring .
siegfried arrives by tarnhelm-magic , having resumed his natural form and left brunnhilde on the boat with gunther .
the vassals learn that the occasion is not battle , but their master 's wedding and party .
gunther leads in a downcast brunnhilde , who is astonished to see siegfried .
she realizes that siegfried has been betrayed by gunther , the man who conquered her was not gunther , but siegfried in disguise .
siegfried , who does not have been brunhilde 's lover , swears on hagen 's spear that her accusations are false .
hagen supervises silently as others take oaths to his advantage .
this time , since the oath is sworn on a weapon , the understanding is that if the oath is proven false , the weapon 's owner should avenge it by killing the weapon .
siegfried leads gutrune and the bystanders off to the wedding feast , leaving brunnhilde , hagen , and gunther alone .
gunther agrees to hagen 's suggestion that siegfried must be killed in order for gunther to regain his standing .
brunnhilde , seeking revenge for siegfried 's manifest treachery , joins the plot and tells hagen that siegfried would be vulnerable to a stab in the back .
hagen repeats his pledge to alberich : to acquire the ring and rule the world through its power .
the rhinemaidens mourn the lost rhine gold .
the rhinemaidens urge him to return the ring and avoid its curse , but he says he prefers to die rather than bargain for his life .
hagen gives him another drink which makes him remember what happened .
siegfried admitted loving brunnhilde , the oath he swore on hagen 's spear was obviously false , so it was hagen 's duty to kill him with it .
his body is carried away in a solemn funeral procession .
gunther blames siegfried 's death on hagen , who replies that siegfried had incurred the penalty of his false oath .
brunnhilde orders a funeral pyre to be assembled by the river endings .
she takes the ring and tells the rhinemaidens to claim it from her ashes .
she rides her horse grane and rides into the flames .
the fire over the river is to protect the rhine , and the rhinemaidens swim in to claim the ring .
as they celebrate the return of the ring and its gold to the river , a red glow is seen in the sky .
as the gibichungs watch , valhalla is finally seen , with gods and heroes seen as described by waltraute in act 1 .
the gods are consumed in the flames .
" dawn and siegfried 's rhine journey " is a short piece of music from the prologue without the singers .
the berlin philharmonic 's last performance before their evacuation from berlin was to the end of world war ii .
warren j . darcy has suggested that wagner 's music was influenced by the " ring " cycle .
the historian john roberts suggested that the killing of siegfried by hagen with a stab in the back gave inspiration for the myth that the german army did not lose world war i , but was instead defeated by a treasonous " stab in the back " from civilians , in particular jews and socialists .
the great german bass kurt moll pointed out that the part of the main villain , hagen , is unique in the bass repertoire .
