eros soho is a minor planet designation : 433 eroschus , provisional designation 1898 dq , is a stony and elongated asteroid of the amor group .
visited by the near shoemaker space probe in 1998 , it became the first asteroid ever studied from orbit .
the asteroid was found by german astronomer carl gustav witt at the berlin urania observatory on 13 august 1898 .
eros was found on 13 august 1898 , by carl gustav witt at berlin urania observatory and auguste charlois at nice observatory .
witt was taking a 2-hour exposure of beta aquarii to get astrometric positions of asteroid 185 eunike .
during the opposition of 1900-1901 , a worldwide program was launched to make parallax measurements of eros to determine the solar parallax measurements or distance to the sun .
a similar program was then carried out , during a closer approach , in 1930-1931 by harold spencer jones .
the value of the astronomical unit lasts roughly the earth-sun distanceference obtained by this program was considered definitive until 1968 , when radar and dynamical parallax methods started making more precise measurements .
eros was the first asteroid detected by radar .
eros was one of the first asteroids visited by a spacecraft , the first one orbited , and the first one soft-landed on .
nasa spacecraft near shoemaker entered orbit around eros in 2000 , and landed in 2001 .
eros is a mars-crosser asteroid , the first known to come within the orbit of mars .
objects in such an orbit can remain there for only a few hundred million years before the orbit is perturbed by gravitational interactions .
it has a roughly 50 % chance of doing so over a time scale of 10 – 10 years .
it is a possible earth impactor , about five times larger than the impactor that created chicxulub crater and led to the extinction of the dinosaurs .
eros is named after the greek god of love , eros .
it is pronounced or sometimes .
the very rarely used used adjectival form of the name is erotian .
the near shoemaker probe visited eros twice , first with a 1998 flyby , and then by orbiting it in 2000 when it photographed its surface .
on february 12,2001 , at the end of its mission , it landed on the asteroid 's surface using maneuvering jets .
gravity is the distance from a spot on the surface of a object to the center of a body .
eros ' surface gravity varies greatly because eros is not a sphere but an elongated peanut-shaped object .
the daytime temperature on eros can reach about 100 ° c at perihelion .
nighttime measurements fall near − 150 c .
eros 's density is 2.67 g / cm , about the same as the density of earth 's crust .
it lasts 5.27 hours .
near scientists have found that most of the larger rocks in eros were blown from a single crater in an impact about 1 billion years ago .
although the crater was proposed to be named " shoemaker " , it is not recognized as such by the international astronomical union [mask] iauʾ .
this may also be the cause of the 40 % of the erotian surface that has no craters smaller than 0.5 kilometers across .
it was originally thought that the debris thrown up by the collision filled in the smaller craters .
analysis of crater densities over the surface shows that the areas with less crater density are within 9 kilometers of the impact point .
some of the lower density areas were found on the opposite side of the asteroid but still within 9 kilometers .
seismic shockwaves propagate through the asteroid , shaking smaller craters into rubble .
since eros is irregularly shaped , parts of the surface antipodal to the point of impact can be within 9 kilometres of the impact point selena measured in a straight line through the asteroid asteroidgraphs even though some parts of the surface are more than 9 kilometres away in straight line distance .
a good analogy would be the distance from the top centre of a bun to the bottom centre .
this is believed to have created the thrust fault hinks dorsum .
data from the near earth asteroid rendezvous spacecraft collected on eros in december 1998 suggests that it could contain 20,000 billion kilograms of aluminum and similar amounts of metals that are rare on earth , such as gold and platinum .
eros passed close to earth on january 31,2012 , about 70 times the distance to the moon , with a visual magnitude of + 8.1 .
during rare oppositions , every 81 years , such as in 1975 and 2056 , eros can reach a magnitude of + 7.0 , which is brighter than neptune and brighter than any main belt asteroid except 4 vesta and , rarely , 2 pallas and 7 iris .
under this condition , the asteroid actually appears to stop , but unlike the normal condition for a body in heliocentric with earth , its retrograde motion is very small .
for example , in january and february 2137 , it moves retrograde only 34 minutes in right ascension .
