david kimball said that the fontainebleau scene and auto da fe " were the most substantial of several incidents borrowed from a contemporary play on philip ii by eugene cormon .
the opera is based on conflicts in the life of carlos , prince of asturias asturias asturias begging 1545 to 15688 .
he was betrothed to elisabeth of valois , part of the peace treaty ending the italian war of 1551 – 59 between the houses of habsburg and valois demanded that she be married instead to his father philip ii of spain .
it was first performed in the salle le peletier in march 1867 .
the first performance in italian was in london in june 1867 .
the first italian version given in italy was in bologna in october 1867 .
it was revised again by verdi , and was given in naples in 1872 .
finally , two other versions were prepared : the first was seen in milan in january 1884 aarhus in which the four acts were based on some original french text which was then translated into french .
it restored the " fontainebleau " first act to the milan four-act version .
over the next twenty years , cuts and additions were made to the opera .
verdi made a lot of cuts in 1866 , after finishing the opera but before composing the ballet , making it too long .
the two were a duet for elisabeth and eboli in act 4 , scene 1 .
after the ballet had been composed , it emerged during the 1867 rehearsal period that , without further cuts , the opera would not finish before midnight .
verdi then authorised some further cuts , which were , the introduction to act 1 dwarfs with a chorus of woodcutters and their wives , and including the first appearance of elisabeth andersen .
the opera was first published at the time of the opening .
verdi allowed the opera authorities to end act 4 , scene 2 with the death of posagement .
despite a grandiose production designed by scenic artists charles-antoine cambon and joseph thierry thierry breuning acts i and iii concurrently , edouard desplechin and jean-baptiste lavastre visually act ii and vised acts 2 and voslav , and auguste alfred rube and philippe chaperonnier act iv ; it appears to have been a " problem " for the opera .
it was first performed in italy but in london at the royal opera house on 4 june 1867 covent garden on 4 june 1867 whitehall , where it was produced and conducted by michael costa .
the opera was not as expensive , but with the first act being removed , the ballet in act 3 was omitted .
the duet between philip and the inquisitor was shortened by four lines , and elisabeth 's aria in act 5 had only parts of the middle section and the reprise .
later when he learned of the changes , verdi was very irritated , but costa 's version expected verdi himself to make a few years later in 1882-83 .
the first performance of the opera was conducted at the teatro comunale di bologna in 1867 .
the first performance of the opera was on february 9,1868 at the teatro apollo , perhaps unsurprisingly .
it was first performed in milan , on march 25,1868 .
the length was a problem , and subsequent performances were generally cut .
these were additions to the scene for posa and the king in act 2 .
verdi composed the opera in the middle ages , and the opera was composed by verdi to an italian rather than a french text .
in addition , there were cuts to the duet between carlos and elisabeth in act 5 .
the idea of reducing the scope and scale of " don carlos " had originally come to verdi in 1875 .
by april 1882 , he was in paris where he was ready to make changes .
he was already familiar with the work of charles-louis-etienne nuitter , who had worked on french translations of " la forza del destino " and " aida " with du locle .
it was completed by march 1883 .
an italian translation of this revised french text , re-using much of the original 1866 translation by de lauzieres , was made by .
it was first performed in milan in 1884 .
verdi had accepted the need to remove the first act .
performances of " don carlo " in the first half of the twentieth century were rare , but in the post second world war it has been regularly performed , particularly in the four-act 1884 " milan version " in italian .
charles mackerras conducted this five-act version together with verdi 's original prelude , the woodcutters ' scene and the original endingpoint in an english translation for english national opera at the london coliseum in 1975 .
today , it is translated into italian and presented in the milan and modena versions .
stagings and broadcasts of the original five-act french version of the opera have become more frequent in the later 20th and into the 21st century .
the bbc concert orchestra conducted by john matheson in june 1973 .
julian budden said that " this was the first complete performance of what could be called the 1866 conception in french with the addition of the ballet . "
some of the best performances of the five act french version have included la scala milan in 1970 , la monnaie in brussels in 1983 , a co-production between the theatre du chatelet , paris and the royal opera , london in 1996 , staatsoper vienna 2004 and opera national de paris in 2017 .
the forest of fontainebleau , france in winter
woodcutters and their wives are heard .
they complain of their hard life , made worse by war with spain .
elisabeth , the daughter of the king of france , arrives with her attendants .
she tells the people that her marriage to don carlos , infante and son of philip ii , king of spain will bring the war to an end .
carlos comes out from hiding , has seen elisabeth and fallen in love with her aria : " je l ' ai vue " / " io la vidi "
when she reappears , he pretends to be a member of the count of lerma 's delegation .
carlos reveals his true identity and his feelings , which she reciprocates duet : " de quels transports poignants et doux " / " di quale amor , di quanto ardordordor "
a cannon-shot is that peace has been declared between spain and france .
when lerma and his friends confirm this , elisabeth is sad but feels bound to accept , in order to consolidate the peace .
scene 1 : the monastery of saint-justacio san jeronimo de yustense in spain "
the scene takes place soon after king philip ii and elisabeth have married .
monks pray before the tomb of the former emperor charles v aarhus " carlo quinto " gaston .
don carlos enters , anguished that the woman he loves is now his stepmother .
when carlos pauses in his lament , the leader of the monks say that the turbulence of the world persists even in sacred places ; we shall rest except in heaven .
carlos thinks it sounds like that of the emperor charles v . carlos further notices that the monk physically resembles the emperor .
the two greet each other happily aria : " j ' etais en flandres " ;
posa asks for the infante 's aid .
he encourages carlos to leave spain and go to flanders .
the two men swear eternal friendship ashore duet : " dieu , tu semas dans nos ames " / " dio , che nell ' alma infondere "
king philip and his new wife enter also to make homage at charles v 's tomb .
scene 2 : a garden near saint-just
she is trying to seduce an alluring veiled beauty , who turns out to be his own neglected wife .
she gives her a letter from don carlos .
when they are alone , don carlos asks her to request the king to send him to flanders .
she promptly agrees , provoking carlos to renew his declarations of love , which she rejects .
he orders the lady-in-waiting who was meant to be attending her , the countess of aremberg , to return to france .
aria : " oh ma chere compagne " / " non pianger , mia compagna "
the king offers to reward him for his loyalty and service .
the king gratefully accepts this offer , and again warns posa to beware of the grand inquisitor .
carlos is in the queen 's garden in madrid .
elisabeth is tired , and wishes to concentrate on the coronation of the king .
she exchanges masks with eboli , assuming that her absence will not be noticed , and leaves .
don carlos decides to marry her , and she is in the dark .
eboli says that she is a formidable and dangerous foe , with power which posa does not yet know about .
he orders his dagger , and he plans to kill her .
carlos agrees to entrust to him any sensitive , potentially incriminating political documents that he may have .
scene 2 : in front of the cathedral of valladolid is being made for an auto-da-fe , the public parade and burning of heretics .
a royal procession follows , and the king addresses the people , promising to protect them with fire and sword .
don carlos enters with six flemish envoys .
the people and the court are sympathetic , the king , and the monks , who are helping to capture the envoys .
he steps forward and defuses the situation by taking carlos ' sword from him .
relieved and grateful , the king raises posa to the rank of duke .
the guards capture carlos , the monks fire the woodpile , and as the flames start to rise , a heavenly voice can be heard promising heavenly peace to the condemned souls .
he is suffering from insomnia , the king , in a reverie , tells his position that he has to be eternally vigilant and that he will only sleep properly when he is in his tomb in the escorial aria : " elle ne m ' aime " / " ella giammai m ' aime " .
frightened and overwhelmed , the king asks the grand inquisitor to forget about the past discussion .
in response to his calls for help , into the chamber come eboli and posa .
their laments of suspicion cause the king to realize that he has been wrong to suspect his wifemissible " maudit soit le soupcon infame " / " ah , sii maledetto , sospetto fatale "arth .
eboli tells the king that elisabeth and carlos were having an affair .
she then becomes friends with her own beauty and pride , and she curses her own beauty and pride .
posa arrives and tells carlos that he ought to save carlos from being executed .
he adds that he can die if his friend can save flanders and rule over a happier spain aria .
the king sees that posa is dead and cries out in sorrow .
the crowd pushes its way into the prison and threatens the king , demanding the release of carlos .
the people are brave enough at first in the presence of the king , but they are scared by the arrival of the grand inquisitor .
the moonlit monastery of yuste was a monastery in the city of yuste .
elisabeth kneels before the tomb of charles v .
she is committed to help don carlos on his way to fulfill his destiny in flanders .
they say a final farewell , promising to meet again in heaven duet : " au revoir dans un monde ou la vie est meilleure " / " ma lassu ci vedremo in un mondo migliore "
the king and the grand inquisitor enter , with several guards .
he is fighting well in spite of being outnumbered , when a mysterious figure skater the leader of the monks from the earlier scene at the tomb , which is listed here as act 2 scene 1 scene 1 but is usually the opening scene of the opera .
he grabs carlos by the shoulder , and loudly proclaims that the turbulence of the world persists even in the church ; we [mask] rest except in heaven .