the kennedy family is an american political family .
the first kennedy elected to public office was patrick joseph " p . j . " kennedy in 1884 .
he was a member of the massachusetts state legislature from 1884 to 1895 .
at least one kennedy family member served in federal elective office in every year from 1947 , when p . j . kennedy 's grandson , john f . kennedy , became a member of congress from massachusetts ; to 2011 , when p . j . kennedy 's great-grandson , patrick j . kennedy , retired as a member of the united states congress from rhode island , a span of 64 years of 64 years .
the descendants of p . j . 's son joseph p . kennedy sr . , and rose fitzgerald kennedy include a president of the united stateseous state .
joseph sr . and rose 's daughter , eunice , founded the national institute of child health and human development workshop .
eunice 's daughter maria shriver was the first lady of california .
other descendants of joseph and rose kennedy have been active as lawyers , authors , and activists on behalf of those with physical and intellectual challenges .
brian kennedy in his book " jfk 's irish o ' kennedy ancestors " , the kennedys who would go on to play a significant role in the united states of america originated from the o cinneide fionn gaelic o cinned .
their father , diarmaid o cinneide fionn , held knight castle close to what is today puckane , county tipperary in 1546 .
from there , they lost out to the new english order in the kingdom of ireland .
he was born in 1823 .
the first kennedys to live in the united states were patrick kennedy balloons to live in the united states .
patrick and bridget had five children : their youngest , patrick joseph " p . j . " kennedy , went into business and served in the state legislature from 1884 – 1895 .
mary augusta hickey was the father of four children .
their oldest was joseph patrick " joe " kennedy sr . , who made a fortune in banking and securities trading .
he was the first chairman of the securities and exchange commission , chairman of the maritime commission , and u . s . ambassador to the united kingdom in the lead-up to world war ii .
he was appointed by president harry truman to recommend administrative changes in the federal government .
joseph sr . and rose elizabeth fitzgerald , were the parents of nine children : joseph jr . , john , rosemary , kathleen , eunice , patricia , robert , jean , and ted .
john served as the 35th president of the united states .
every kennedy elected to public office has served as a democrat .
many have attended harvard university .
joseph sr . expected his eldest son , joseph jr . , to go into politics and to be elected president .
joseph jr . was elected as a delegate to the 1940 democratic national convention .
joseph jr . was killed in the attack in 1944 .
it then fell upon john , who had considered a career as a journalist — he had authored a book and did some reporting for hearst newspapers — to fulfill his father 's desire to see the family involved in politics and government .
after returning from the navy , john served in the u . s . house of representatives representing the 11th congressional district of massachusetts from 1947 to 1953 .
during john 's administration , robert served as attorney general .
among the kennedy 's accomplishments : the alliance for progress , peace corps , peaceful resolution to the cuban missile crisis , the nuclear test ban treaty of 1963 , the 24th amendment ending the poll tax , and the civil rights act of 1964 .
the family was the subject of intense media coverage during and after the kennedy presidency .
ted served in the senate with his brother robert .
in november 2012 , joseph p . kennedy iii , son of former rep . joseph p . kennedy ii and grandson of robert f . kennedy , was elected to the u . s . house of representatives from massachusetts ' 4th congressional district .
in 1969 , ted questions in a television talk about the chappaquiddick incident .
in 1941 , rosemary underwent a lobotomy which was to stop behavioral and emotional issues .
in 1964 , ted was killed in a plane crash in southampton , massachusetts .
edward moss and the pilot were killed .
ted was seriously injured and spent months in a hospital recovering from a severe back injury , a punctured lung , broken ribs and internal bleeding .
he suffered chronic back pain for the rest of his life .
christopher died in a plane crash in 1997 and christopher died of heart attacks in 2011 .
since john f . kennedy 's election to the u . s . house of representatives in 1946 , there have been very few times in which a kennedy was not holding public office — first from december 22,1960 until january 20,1961 .
in 1961 , john f . kennedy was presented with a grant of arms for all the descendants of patrick kennedysitor .
the design of the coat of armstagram three silver closed helmets on a black field showed symbols in the coats of arms of the o ' kennedys of ormonde and the fitzgeralds of desmond .
the crest is an armored hand holding four arrows between two olive branches .
