in evolutionary biology , adaptive radiation is a process in which organisms diversify rapidly from an ancestral species into a multitude of new forms , particularly when a change in the environment makes new resources available , creates new challenges , or opens new environmental niches .
today , darwin 's finches are galapagos endemics .
darwin 's finches are not actually finches in the true sense , but are members of the tanager family thraupidae .
the ground finches are further specialized to eat seeds of a particular size : the large ground finchulatorygmies " geospiza magnirostris " is the largest species of darwin 's finch .
for example , the most robust medium ground finches could have beaks larger than those of the smallest large ground finches .
these three species often occur sympatrically , and during the rainy season in the gala pagos when food is plentiful , they specialize little and eat the same , easily accessible foods .
it was not well-understood why their beaks were so adapted until peter and rosemary grant studied their feeding behavior in the long dry season .
they have somewhat longer beaks than the ground finches .
one theory is that the finches were able to have a non-adaptive , allopatric speciation event on separate islands in the archipelago , such that when they reconverged on some islands , they were able to maintain reproductive isolation .
the haplochromine cichlid fishes in the great lakes of the east african rift zone are the most speciose modern example of adaptive radiation .
these lakes are believed to be home to about 2,000 different species of cichlid .
cichlids in these lakes fill nearly all of the roles typically filled by a large number of fish families , including those of predators , scavengers , and herbivores , with varying dentitions and head shapes to match their dietary habits .
in each case , the radiation events are only a few million years old , making the very high level of speciation remarkable .
several factors could be responsible for this diversity : the availability of a multitude of niches probably favored specialization , as few other fish taxa are present in the lakes .
also , continual changes in the water level of the lakes during the pleistocene epoch which often turned the largest lakes into several smaller oneshend could have created the conditions for secondary allopatric speciation .
lake tanganyika is the site from which nearly all the cichlid lineages of east africa belonged to both riverine and lake speciestock originated .
they do not form a single single clade .
lake tanganyika is the least speciose of the three largest african great lakes .
lake tanganyika is believed to have formed 9 – 12 million years ago .
giant cichlids spawn only a single time , breeding in their third year and defending their young until they reach a large size , before dying of starvation some time after .
the three species of " altolamprologus " are also piscivores , but with laterally compressed bodies and thick scales enabling them to chase prey into thin cracks in rocks without damaging their skin .
" plecodus straeleni " has evolved large , strangely curved teeth that are designed to scrape scales off of the sides of other fish .
a number of tanganyika 's cichlids are shell-brooders .
a number of other highly specialized tanganyika cichlids exist .
all of the other cichlids in the lake are descendants of a single original colonist species , which itself was descended from tanganyikan ancestors .
the common ancestor of malawi 's species flock is believed to have reached the lake 3.4 million years ago at the earliest , making malawi cichlids ' diversification into their present numbers .
for example , all members of the malawi species are mouth-brooders , meaning the female keeps her eggs in her mouth until they hatch .
however , a number of particularly divergent species are known from malawi .
the deliberate introduction of the nile perchmouth " lates niloticus "arth in the 1950s proved disastrous for victoria cichlids .
however , the original range of morphological and behavioral diversity seen in the lake 's cichlid fauna is still mostly present today , if endangered .
the three most famous example of these radiations are presented below .
while today only 17 species are known to exist in hawaiilania , hawaii may or may not be extinct .
the hawaiian honeycreepers are known for their beaks , which are specialized to satisfy a wide range of dietary needs .
the whole group of hawaiian honeycreepers , the tribe psittirostrini , is made of thick-billed , mostly seed-eating birds , like the laysan finchilly .
in at least some cases , similar morphologies and behaviors appear to have evolved convergently among the hawaiian honeycreepers .
the hawaiian honeycreepers are believed to have descended from a single common ancestor some 15 to 20 million years ago , though estimates range as low as 3.5 million years .
the most famous example of adaptive radiation in plants is the hawaiian silverswords .
they descended from a single common ancestor who arrived in the archipelago up to 15 million years ago .
with over 400 species , often placed in a single genus commits " anolis " foley , they constitute one of the largest radiation events among all lizards .
anole radiation on the mainland has largely been a process of speciation , and is not adaptive to any great degree .
these anoles are all large , canopy-dwelling species with large heads and large lamellae ( scales on the undersides of the fingers and toes that are important for traction in climbing climbing climbing .
each of these islands is home to its own convergent " anolis " adaptive radiation event .
the brightly colored mantellashyllum " mantella " invented the neotropical poison dart frogs of dendrobatidae .
the pseudoxyrhophiines of madagascar have evolved into fossorial , arboreal , terrestrial , and semi-aquatic forms that converge with the colubroid faunas in the rest of the world .
these madagascan examples are significantly older than most of the other examples presented here : madagascar 's fauna has been evolving in isolation since the island split from india some 88 million years ago , and the mantellidae originated around 50 mya .
the k-pg extinction event , which caused the disappearance of the dinosaurs and most other reptilian megafauna 65 million years ago , is seen as having triggered a global adaptive radiation event that created the mammal diversity that exists today .
