paranthropusopusopus from greek " para " beside " ; ανθρωπος , " anthropos " human "dilly lived between 2.6 and 1.1 million years ago .
they probably descended from the gracile australopithecine hominids waived " australopithecus " feathers 2.7 million years ago .
the genus is characterised by robust craniodental anatomy , including gorilla-like sagittal cranial crests .
" paranthropus " skulls have the transverse cranial crests of modern gorillas .
the low rate of enamel fractures on " paranthropus " teeth suggest this characteristic craniodental anatomy evolved to cope with a diet of tough vegetation , rather than hard foods .
a partial cranium and mandible of " paranthropus robustus " was discovered in 1938 by a schoolboy , gert terblanche , at kromdraai dq 70 km south west of pretoriachang in south-west of pretoria .
it was described as a new genus and species by robert broom of the transvaal museum .
the site was excavated in 1993 by francis thackeray of the transvaal museum .
a date of at least 1.95 million years has been obtained for kromdraai b . " paranthropus boisei " was discovered by mary leakey on july 17,1959 , at the flk bed i site of olduvai gorge in tanzania oh 5 [mask] specimen .
mary was working alone .
she rushed back to camp and , at the news louis made a remarkable recovery .
they avoided excavating until des bartlett had photographed the site .
in louis recorded a first name , " titanohomo mirabilis " , reflecting an initial impression of close human affinity .
louis and mary began calling it dear boy .
the recovery was halted on august 7 .
dear boy was found in context with oldowan tools and animal bones .
the fossil was published in " nature " on 15 august 1959 , but due to a strike of the printers the issue was not released until september .
in it louis placed the fossil in the australopithecinae subfamily australopithecinae , creating a new genus for it , " zinjanthropus " , species " boisei " , which is no longer used .
" zinj " is an ancient arabic word for the coast of east africa .
louis based his classification on twenty differences from australopithecus .
at that time palaeoanthropology was in a mood to lump species .
this was nearly forgotten for louis over the creation of a new genus .
dart rescued him with the now famous joke , " . . what would have happened if mrs . ples had met dear boy one dark night . "
the battle of the name went on for many years .
on the other hand , it brought the leakeys and dr . melville bell grosvenor of the national geographic society together .
the leakeys became international and had no trouble finding money .
the zinj question ultimately became part of the " australopithecus " / " paranthropus " questionnaire which only applied to the robust australopithecines urbana-type .
all species of " paranthropus " were bipedal , and many lived during a time when species of the genus " homo "pods were likely descended from " australopithecus "arthes .
" paranthropus " first appeared about 2.7 million years ago .
most species of " paranthropus " had a brain about 40 percent the size of modern human .
there was some size variation between the different species of " paranthropus " , but most stood roughly tall and were quite well muscled .
" paranthropus " lived in wooded areas rather than the grasslands of " australopithecus " .
" paranthropus " is thought to be bipedal based on the anatomical structure of its hips , legs , and feet .
the pelvis is similar to " a . afarensis " , but the hip joint , including the femoral head and acetabulum , are smaller in " paranthropus " .
the similar hip structure between " a . afarensis " and " paranthropus " suggests that they had a similar walking gait , and that " paranthropus " moved like the " gracile australopiths " .
they show anatomical similarity to modern humans in the big toe of their foot and their well-developed plantar aponeurosis .
the hallux metatarsal shows more internal support , and more distal articular surface which causes more connection and support to the other bones in the foot .
the extra support in the big toe and extensive plantar aponeurosis shows that " paranthropus " had hyperextension of their toes for a " toe-off " gait cycle , characteristic of modern bipedalism in humans .
the behavior of " paranthropus " was quite different from that of the genus " homo " , in that it was not as adaptable to its environment or as resourceful .
evidence exists in its anatomy , which was specifically tailored to a diet of grubs and plants .
this would have made it more reliant on favorable environmental conditions than members of the genus " homo " , which consumed a much wider variety of foods .
because it was a specialist species , it had more difficulty adapting to a changing climate , leading to its extinction .
evolutionary biologist richard dawkins notes " perhaps several different species " of robust hominids , and " as usual their affinities , and the exact number of species , are hotly disputed .
names that have been attached to various of these creatures . . are " australopithecus " cheltenham or " paranthropus " robustus " .
there are some differences between " p . aethiopicus , p . boisei " and " p . robustus " .
the emergence of robusts could be either a display of convergent evolution .
" p . aethiopicus , p . boisei " and " p . robustus " should be placed into a distinct genus , " paranthropus " .
up through the late 20th century most of the scientific community included all the species of both " australopithecus " and " paranthropus " in a single genus .
currently , both taxonomic systems are used and accepted in the scientific community .
some researchers , beginning with robert broom , think that there is a difference between " australopithecus " and " paranthropus " .
however , this discussion appears largely moot as the genus " homo " also appears to have emerged in the genus australopithecus , and a genus can not be part of another genus .
for the most part the " australopithecus " species " a . afarensis " , " a . africanus " , and " a . anamensis " either disappeared from the fossil record before the appearance of early humans or seem to have been the ancestors of " homo habilis " , yet " p . boisei " and " p . p . boisei "
" paranthropus " shared the earth with some early examples of the genus " h . habilis " , such as " h . ergaster " , and possibly even " h . erectus " .
" australopithecus afarensis " and " a . anamensis " had disappeared by this time .
there were differences between " australopithecus " and " paranthropus " , but the differences were found on the cranial remains .
the remains of the skeleton were similar to the bone .
" paranthropus " was more massively built .
" paranthropus " had smaller braincases than " homo " .
" paranthropus " is associated with stone tools both in southern and eastern africa .
most believe that early " homo " was the tool maker , but hand fossils from swartkrans , south africa , indicate that the hand of " paranthropus robustus " was also adapted for precision grasping and tool use .
most " paranthropus " species seem almost certainly not to have used language or to have controlled fire .
in 2011 , thure e . cerling of the university of utah and colleagues published a study in the " proceedings of the national academy of sciences " of their work with the carbon isotopes in the enamel of 24 teeth from 22 " paranthropus " individuals who lived in east africa between 1.4 million and 1.9 million years ago .
their results suggest that " paranthropus boisei " dined more heavily on c4 plants .
it is debated whether the large molars of " paranthropus " was an adaptation to eating hard foods , however recent research suggests a diet containing tough vegetation was more commonly consumed .
