a house is a building that is used to live in a building .
they can range from simple dwellings such as hut of nomadic tribes and the improvised shacks in shantytowns to complex , fixed structures of wood , brick , concrete or other materials containing plumbing , ventilation , and electrical systems .
houses use a range of different roofing systems to keep precipitation such as rain from getting into the dwelling space .
houses may have doors or locks to protect the people and contents from burglars .
modern houses in western cultures will have one or more bedrooms and bathrooms , a kitchen or cooking area , and a living room .
a house may have a separate dining room .
some large houses in north america have a recreation room .
domestic animals such as chickens or larger livestock rustling may share part of the house with humans .
a household is a social unit that lives in a house .
a household is a family unit of some kind , although households may also be other social groups , such as roommates or in a rooming house , unconnected individuals .
some houses only have a dwelling space for one family or similar-sized group .
a house may be accompanied by outbuildings , such as a garage for vehicles or a shed for gardening equipment and tools .
a house may have a backyard or frontyard .
the english word " house " comes from the old english " hus " meaning dwelling , shelter , home , house .
the house itself gave rise to the letter ' b ' through an early proto-semitic hieroglyphic symbol depicting a house .
the symbol was called " bayt " , " bet " or " beth " in various related languages .
beit is the roof of the house .
architects of the house design rooms to meet the needs of the people who will live in the house .
feng shui , originally a chinese method of moving houses according to such factors as rain and micro-climates , has recently expanded its scope to address the design of interior spaces , with a view to promoting harmonious effects on the people living inside the house , although no actual effect has ever been demonstrated .
feng shui can also mean the " aura " in or around a dwelling .
the square footage of a house in the united states says the area of " living space " , excluding the garage and other non-living spaces .
the square metres figure of a house in europe reports the area of the walls enclosing the home .
the number of floors or levels making up the house can affect the square footage of a home .
many houses have several large rooms with special functions and several very small rooms for other reasons .
these may include a living / eating area , a sleeping area , and gaston if suitable facilities and services exist .
some larger properties may also have rooms such as a spa room , indoor pool , indoor basketball court , and other ' non-essential ' facilities .
in traditional agriculture-oriented societies , domestic animals such as chickens or larger livestock aarhus like cattle rustling often share part of the house with human beings .
most modern houses will at least have a bedroom , a kitchen , or a cooking area , and a living room .
a typical " foursquare house " occurred commonly in the early history of the usa where they were mainly built .
little is known about the earliest origin of the house and its interior .
the first form of architecture was a frame of timber branches finished in mud .
philip tabor later states the contribution of 17th century dutch houses as the foundation of houses today .
in the middle ages , the manor houses made different activities and events .
the house also has many people , including family , relatives , employees , servants and their guests .
their lifestyles were largely communal , as areas such as the great hall enforced the custom of dining and meetings and the solar intended for shared sleeping beds .
during the 15th and 16th centuries , the palazzo was made of many rooms .
unlike the qualities and uses of the manor houses , most rooms of the palazzo contained no purpose , yet were given several doors .
these doors adjoined rooms in which robin evans describes as a " matrix of discrete but thoroughly interconnected chambers . "
the layout allowed people to walk room from one door to another , thus breaking the boundaries of privacy .
although very public , the open plan encouraged sociality and connectivity for all inhabitants .
an early example of the segregation of rooms and consequent enhancement of privacy may be found in 1597 at the beaufort house built in chelsea .
the tower was designed by english architect john thorpe .
the separation of the passageway from the room developed the function of the corridor .
this new extension was revolutionary at the time .
english architect sir roger pratt says " the common way in the whole length of the house , avoids the offices from one molesting the other by continual passing through them . "
social hierarchies within the 17th century were highly regarded .
more privacy is offered to the occupant as pratt further claims , " the ordinary servants may never publicly appear in passing to and fro for their occasions there . "
this social divide between rich and poor favored the physical integration of the corridor into housing by the 19th century .
sociologist witold rybczynski wrote , " the subdivision of the house into day and night uses , and into formal and informal areas , had begun . "
the rooms were changed from public to private .
the 17th century dutch house was smaller , and was only inhabited by up to four to five members .
this was due to their " self-reliance " , in contrast to the dependence on servants , and a design for a lifestyle centered on the family .
it was important for the dutch to separate work from domesticity .
this way of living and the home is similar to the contemporary family and their dwellings .
house layouts also added the idea of the corridor as well as the importance of function and privacy .
by the end of the 17th century , the house was changed to become employment-free .
this came in favour for the industrial revolution , gaining large-scale factory production and workers .
the house layout of the dutch and its functions are still relevant today .
in the american context , some professions , such as doctors , in the 19th and early 20th century , usually operated out of the front room or parlor or had a two-room office on their property , which was detached from the house .
by the mid-20th century , the high-tech equipment was a shift in which the contemporary doctor typically works from an office or hospital .
the introduction of technology and electronic systems within the house has questioned the impressions of privacy as well as the segregation of work from home .
advances of surveillance and communications allow insight of personal habits and private lives .
as a result , the " private becomes ever more public , and the desire for a protective home life increases , fuelled by the very media that undermine it " writes hill .
work has been altered because of the increase of communications .
the " deluge of information " , has expressed the efforts of work , conveniently gaining access inside the house .
although commuting is reduced , " the desire to separate working and living remains apparent . "
in jonathan hill 's book " immature architecture " , he says that this new invasion of privacy was " electromagnetic weather " .
natural or man-made weather remains concurrent inside or outside the house , but the electromagnetic weather is able to generate within both positions .
some architects have designed homes in which eating , working and living are brought together .
in the united states , modern house-construction techniques include light-frame construction strategies in areas with access to supplies of woodbery and adobe or sometimes rammed-earth construction across areas with scarce wood-resources .
some areas use brick , and quarried stone has long provided walling .
aluminum and steel have displaced some traditional building materials .
more popular alternative construction materials include insulating concrete forms filled with concrete cubic faces .
more generally , people often build houses out of the nearest available material .
for example , a large fraction of american houses use wood .
in the 1900stifying , some house designers started using prefabrication .
sears , roebuck & co . first sold their sears catalog homes to the general public in 1908 .
this type of prefab was used in world war ii .
first small inside rooms framing , later , whole walls were carried to the construction site .
the original idea was to use the labor force inside a shelter during inclement weather .
more recently builders have begun to work with structural engineers who use computers and finite element analysis to design prefabricated steel framed homes with known resistance to high wind loads and seismic forces .
these newer products provide labor savings , more consistent quality , and possibly accelerated construction processes .
lesser-used construction methods have gainedgence or regained popularity in recent years .
though not in wide use , these methods frequently appeal to homeowners who may become actively involved in the construction process .
in the developed world , energy-conservation has become important in house-design .
housing produces a major proportion of carbon emissions emissions appearing in the united kingdom .
there are many types of methods .
they include the zero-energy house , the passive solar house , the autonomous buildings , the superinsulated and houses built to the passivhaus standard .
one tool of earthquake engineering is base isolation .
base isolation is a collection of structural elements of a building that should break up from the shaking ground thus protecting the building 's integrity and enhancing its seismic performance .
this technology is a kind of seismic vibration control .
normally , excavations are made around the building and the building is separated from the foundations .
steel beams replace the connections to the foundations .
while the " base isolation " tends to restrict transmission of the ground motion to the building , it also keeps the building properly over the foundation .
careful attention to detail is required where the building interfaces with the ground , especially at entrances , stairways and ramps , to ensure sufficient relative motion of those structural elements .
bamboo is very strong , because it comes from fast-grow plants .
adding that bamboos are common in asia , bamboo-made houses are popular in some asian countries .
in many parts of the world , the houses are constructed using stone materials .
in manila 's payatas neighborhood , slum houses are often made of garbage that comes from a nearby garbage dump .
in dakar , it is not uncommon to see houses made of recycled materials standing atop a mixture of garbage and sand which serves as a foundation .
the garbage-sand mixture is also used to protect the house from flooding .
buildings with historical importance have legal restrictions .
new houses in the uk are not covered by the sale of goods act .
when purchasing a new house the buyer has different legal protection than buying other products .
new houses in the uk are covered by a national house building council guarantee .
with the growth of dense settlement , humans designed ways of identifying houses and parcels of land .
individual houses sometimes acquire proper names , and those names may acquire in their turn considerable emotional connotations .
for example , the house of " howards end " or the castle of " brideshead revisited " .
a more systematic and general approach to identifying houses may use various ways of numbering .
humans often build houses for domestic animals .
familiar animal houses built by humans include birdhouses , henhouses and doghouses .
houses may express the opinions of their builders or their people .
thus a vast house may serve as a sign of conspicuous wealth whereas a low-profile house built of recycled materials may indicate support of energy conservation .
houses of particular historical significance caused by historic houses to be used to protect historic houses .
commemorative plaques may mark such structures .
home ownership is a measure of wealth in economics .
contrast to house-destruction , tent dwelling and house rebuilding in the wake of many natural disasters .
