they can range from simple dwellings such as hut of nomadic tribes and the improvised shacks in shantytowns to complex , fixed structures of wood , brick , concrete or other materials containing plumbing , ventilation , and electrical systems .
houses use a range of different roofing systems to keep precipitation such as rain from getting into the dwelling space .
houses may have doors or locks to protect the people and contents from burglars .
modern houses in western cultures will have one or more bedrooms and bathrooms , a kitchen or cooking area , and a living room .
a house may have a separate dining room .
domestic animals such as chickens or larger livestock rustling may share part of the house with humans .
some houses only have a dwelling space for one family or similar-sized group .
a house may be accompanied by outbuildings , such as a garage for vehicles or a shed for gardening equipment and tools .
the house itself gave rise to the letter ' b ' through an early proto-semitic hieroglyphic symbol depicting a house .
feng shui , originally a chinese method of moving houses according to such factors as rain and micro-climates , has recently expanded its scope to address the design of interior spaces , with a view to promoting harmonious effects on the people living inside the house , although no actual effect has ever been demonstrated .
the square footage of a house in the united states says the area of " living space " , excluding the garage and other non-living spaces .
the square metres figure of a house in europe reports the area of the walls enclosing the home .
the number of floors or levels making up the house can affect the square footage of a home .
many houses have several large rooms with special functions and several very small rooms for other reasons .
these may include a living / eating area , a sleeping area , and gaston if suitable facilities and services exist .
some larger properties may also have rooms such as a spa room , indoor pool , indoor basketball court , and other ' non-essential ' facilities .
in traditional agriculture-oriented societies , domestic animals such as chickens or larger livestock aarhus like cattle rustling often share part of the house with human beings .
a typical " foursquare house " occurred commonly in the early history of the usa where they were mainly built .
little is known about the earliest origin of the house and its interior .
the house also has many people , including family , relatives , employees , servants and their guests .
their lifestyles were largely communal , as areas such as the great hall enforced the custom of dining and meetings and the solar intended for shared sleeping beds .
unlike the qualities and uses of the manor houses , most rooms of the palazzo contained no purpose , yet were given several doors .
these doors adjoined rooms in which robin evans describes as a " matrix of discrete but thoroughly interconnected chambers . "
the layout allowed people to walk room from one door to another , thus breaking the boundaries of privacy .
an early example of the segregation of rooms and consequent enhancement of privacy may be found in 1597 at the beaufort house built in chelsea .
english architect sir roger pratt says " the common way in the whole length of the house , avoids the offices from one molesting the other by continual passing through them . "
this social divide between rich and poor favored the physical integration of the corridor into housing by the 19th century .
the 17th century dutch house was smaller , and was only inhabited by up to four to five members .
this was due to their " self-reliance " , in contrast to the dependence on servants , and a design for a lifestyle centered on the family .
house layouts also added the idea of the corridor as well as the importance of function and privacy .
the house layout of the dutch and its functions are still relevant today .
in the american context , some professions , such as doctors , in the 19th and early 20th century , usually operated out of the front room or parlor or had a two-room office on their property , which was detached from the house .
the introduction of technology and electronic systems within the house has questioned the impressions of privacy as well as the segregation of work from home .
as a result , the " private becomes ever more public , and the desire for a protective home life increases , fuelled by the very media that undermine it " writes hill .
the " deluge of information " , has expressed the efforts of work , conveniently gaining access inside the house .
although commuting is reduced , " the desire to separate working and living remains apparent . "
in jonathan hill 's book " immature architecture " , he says that this new invasion of privacy was " electromagnetic weather " .
natural or man-made weather remains concurrent inside or outside the house , but the electromagnetic weather is able to generate within both positions .
some areas use brick , and quarried stone has long provided walling .
for example , a large fraction of american houses use wood .
sears , roebuck & co . first sold their sears catalog homes to the general public in 1908 .
this type of prefab was used in world war ii .
the original idea was to use the labor force inside a shelter during inclement weather .
more recently builders have begun to work with structural engineers who use computers and finite element analysis to design prefabricated steel framed homes with known resistance to high wind loads and seismic forces .
though not in wide use , these methods frequently appeal to homeowners who may become actively involved in the construction process .
base isolation is a collection of structural elements of a building that should break up from the shaking ground thus protecting the building 's integrity and enhancing its seismic performance .
normally , excavations are made around the building and the building is separated from the foundations .
while the " base isolation " tends to restrict transmission of the ground motion to the building , it also keeps the building properly over the foundation .
careful attention to detail is required where the building interfaces with the ground , especially at entrances , stairways and ramps , to ensure sufficient relative motion of those structural elements .
in many parts of the world , the houses are constructed using stone materials .
in manila 's payatas neighborhood , slum houses are often made of garbage that comes from a nearby garbage dump .
in dakar , it is not uncommon to see houses made of recycled materials standing atop a mixture of garbage and sand which serves as a foundation .
the garbage-sand mixture is also used to protect the house from flooding .
new houses in the uk are not covered by the sale of goods act .
when purchasing a new house the buyer has different legal protection than buying other products .
new houses in the uk are covered by a national house building council guarantee .
a more systematic and general approach to identifying houses may use various ways of numbering .
thus a vast house may serve as a sign of conspicuous wealth whereas a low-profile house built of recycled materials may indicate support of energy conservation .
home ownership is a measure of wealth in economics .
contrast to house-destruction , tent dwelling and house rebuilding in the wake of many natural disasters .