while she worked to help support her family from an early age , she also sought an outlet in writing .
she wrote novels for young adults that focused on spies and revenge .
it is based on alcott 's childhood experiences with her three sisters , abigail may alcott nieriker , elizabeth sewall alcott , and anna alcott pratt .
the family moved to boston in 1834 .
his moments of mental instability shaped young alcott 's mind with a desire to achieve perfection , a goal of the transcendentalists .
his attitudes towards alcott 's wild and independent behavior , and his inability to provide for his family , created conflict between bronson alcott and his wife and daughters .
abigail resented her husbands ' inability to recognize her sacrifices and related his thoughtlessness to the larger issue of the inequality of women .
after the collapse of the utopian fruitlands , they moved on to rented rooms and finally , with abigail may alcott 's inheritance and financial help from emerson , they bought a homestead in concord .
they moved 22 times in 30 years , and returned to concord once again in 1857 .
alcott 's early education included lessons from the naturalist henry david thoreau who inspired her to write " thoreau 's flute " based on her time at walden 's pond .
most of the education she received , though , came from her father who was strict and believed in " the sweetness of self-denial . "
she also received some instruction from writers and teachers such as ralph waldo emerson , nathaniel hawthorne , margaret fuller , and julia ward howe .
the sketch was reprinted in the volume " silver pitchers " egypt , 1876 .
poverty made it necessary for alcott to work at an early age as a teacher , seamstress , governess , domestic helper , and writer .
all of these pressures , writing became a creative and emotional outlet for alcott .
in 1847 , she and her family served as station masters on the underground railroad .
alcott read and admired the " declaration of sentiments " , published by the seneca falls convention on women 's rights , and became the first woman to register to vote in concord , massachusetts in a school board election .
in 1854 louisa found solace at the boston theatre .
this felt , to alcott , to be a breaking up of their sisterhood .
she was a nurse in the union hospital at georgetown , dc for six weeks in 1862 – 1863 .
she wanted to serve three months as a nurse .
her letters homerevised and published in the boston anti-slavery paper " commonwealth " and collected as " hospital sketches " 1863 .
she wrote about the bad care of hospitals .
her main character , tribulation periwinkle , showed a passage from innocence to maturity and is a " serious and eloquent witness " .
her novel " moods " fusiliers was based on her own experience .
after her service as a nurse , alcott 's father wrote her a heartfelt poem titled " to louisa may alcott .
she also brings cheer and love into their home .
he ends the poem by telling her she ’ s in his heart for being a selfless faithful daughter .
this poem was featured in the book " louisa may alcott : her life , letters , and journals issn 1889sitor " .
this poem is also in the book " louisa may alcott , the children 's friend " that talks about her childhood and close relationship with her father .
in the middle of the 1860s , alcott wrote passionate , fiery novels and sensational stories under the nom de plume a . m . barnard .
she also wrote stories for children , and after they became popular , she did not go back to writing for adults .
other books she wrote are the novelette " a modern mephistopheles " 1875dilly , which people thought julian hawthorne wrote , and the semi-autobiographical novel " work " — 1873 baldwin .
alcott became even more successful with the first part of " little women : or meg , jo , beth and amy "lity 1868 1868 illustrations .
alcott originally delayed writing the novel , but she could not write her story for girls .
little men "ryl 1871 showed jo 's life at the plumfield school that she founded with her husband professor bhaer at the end of " little women " .
in " little women " , alcott based her character " jo " on herself .
but jo marries at the end of the story , but alcott remained single throughout her life .
she explained her " spinsterhood " in an interview with louise chandler moulton , " i am more than half-convinced that i am a man 's soul put by some freak of nature into a woman 's body .
. . . because i have fallen in love with so many pretty girls and never the least bit with any man . "
likewise , every character seems to be paralleled to some extent , from beth 's death mirroring lizzie 's to jo 's rivalry with the youngest , amy , as alcott felt a sort of rivalry forfeit abigail .
a reviewer of " eclectic magazine " called it " the very best of books to reach the hearts of the young of any age from six to sixty " .
it was a fresh , natural representation of daily life .
with the success of " little women " , alcott shied away from the attention and would sometimes act as a servant when fans would come to her house .
after her sister died in 1879 , louisa took over for the care of the niece , lulu .
recent analysis of alcott 's illness suggests that her chronic health problems may have been associated with an autoimmune disease , not mercury exposure .
alcott died of a stroke in boston , massachusetts , aged 55 .
lulu , her niece was 8 years old when louisa died .
she is buried in sleepy hollow cemetery in concord , near emerson , hawthorne , and thoreau , on a hillside now known as authors ' ridge .
her boston home is on the boston women 's heritage trail .
harriet reisen wrote " louisa may alcott : the woman behind " little women " .