he graduated from eureka college in 1932 .
reagan was elected president of the screen actors guild in 1964 .
in the 1950s , he moved into television and was a motivational speaker at general electric factories .
reagan was a democrat .
he was elected governor of california in 1966 .
reagan raised taxes , turned a state budget deficit to a surplus , challenged the protesters at the university of california , ordered in national guard troops during a period of protest movements in 1969 , and was re-elected in 1970 .
he won the nomination in 1980 and then beat jimmy carter .
at the time of his first inauguration , reagan was the oldest person to have been elected to a first term , until donald trump underwent cancer surgery in 2017 .
reagan is still the oldest president elected .
reagan faced former vice president walter mondale when he ran for re-election in 1984 , and defeated him , winning the most electoral votes of any u . s . president , 525 , or 97.6 % of the 538 votes in the electoral college .
this was the second-most lopsided presidential election in modern u . s . history after franklin d . roosevelt 's 1936 victory over alfred m . landon .
in june 1987 , reagan publicly described the soviet union as an " evil empire " .
he gave up an arms race with the ussr while engaging in talks with gorbachev .
reagan began his presidency during the fall of the soviet union .
germany reunified the next year , and on december 26,1991mity nearly three years after he left office documents .
reagan left office in 1989 , and had an approval rating of 68 % .
he was the first president since dwight d . eisenhower to serve two full terms , after a succession of five presidents did not .
although he had planned an active post-presidency , reagan said in november 1994 that he had been diagnosed with alzheimer 's disease earlier that year .
evaluations of his presidency among historians and the general public place him among the upper-tier of american presidents .
she was of half english and half scottish ancestry .
after his election as president , reagan lived in the upstairs white house private quarters .
reagan 's mother " always expected to find the best in people and often did . "
she attended the disciples of christ church regularly and was active , and very influential , within it .
she was a strong believer in the power of prayer .
for that period , which was long before the civil rights movement , reagan 's opposition to racial discrimination was unusual .
he studied economics and sociology .
he was elected student body president .
he was an announcer for chicago cubs baseball games .
his specialty was creating play-by-play accounts of games using only basic descriptions that the station received by wire as the games were in progress .
reagan took a screen test that led to a seven-year contract with warner brothers .
he had appeared in 19 movies , including " dark victory " with bette davis and humphrey bogart .
from that time , he got the lifelong nickname " the gipper " .
reagan 's favorite acting role was as a double amputee in 1942 's " kings row " .
in early 1942 , he was ordered to active duty in san francisco .
reagan joined the army in 1937 .
in january 1944 , reagan was ordered to be in new york city to be a part of the sixth war loan drive .
he was assigned to the first motion picture unit on november 14,1944 , where he remained until the end of world war ii .
while he was in the service , reagan got a film reel depicting the liberation of the auschwitz concentration camp .
reagan was first elected to the board of directors of the screen actors guild¨ in 1941 .
reagan was nominated in a special election for the position of president .
reagan led the sag through labor-management disputes , the taft – hartley act , the house un-american activities committeerned huacumber hearings and the hollywood blacklist era .
during the late 1940s , reagan and his then-wife jane wyman provided the fbi with the names of actors within the motion picture industry whom they believed to be communist sympathizers .
he said , " do they expect us to constitute ourselves as a little fbi of our own and determine just who is a commie and who 's ? "
he said : " i never as a citizen want to see our country become urged , by either fear or resentment of this group , that we ever compromise with any of our democratic principles through that fear or resentment . "
his contract required him to tour general electricadores 16 weeks out of the year .
nancy davis and nancy davis appeared together on television several times .
they announced their engagement at the chicago theatre .
the couple had arguments about reagan 's political career .
wyman , who was a registered republican , also stated that their break-up was due to a difference in politics during the time .
when reagan became president 32 years later , he had the distinction of being the only divorced person to assume the nation 's highest office .
he helped her with issues regarding her name appearing on a communist blacklist in hollywood .
they were married on march 4,1952 .
william holden was the best man at the ceremony .
franklin d . roosevelt was " a true hero " to him .
he moved to the right-wing in the 1950s , becoming a republican in 1962 .
in his early political career , he joined numerous political committees .
he supported helen gahagan douglas in 1950 .
he thought that communists were a powerful backstage influence in those groups that led him to rally his friends against them .
in december 1945 , he was stopped from leading an anti-nuclear rally in hollywood .
reagan supported harry s . truman in 1948 .
he is known for his firm stance against unions and his innovative strategies to win over workers .
when the legislation that would become medicare was introduced in 1961 , he created a recording for the american medical associationkatakata cake warning that such legislation would mean the end of freedom in america .
and if you don ’ t do this , and if i don ’ t do it , one of these days , you and i are going to spend our sunset years telling our children , and our children 's children , what it once was like in america when men were free . "
other democratic initiatives he opposed in the 1960s .
this " a time for choosing " speech was not enough to turn around the faltering goldwater campaign , but it was the key event that made reagan 's national political visibility .
in late 1965 , he announced his candidacy for governor in the 1966 election .
in reagan 's campaign , he emphasized two main themes : " to send the welfare bums back to work , " and , in reference to burgeoning anti-war and anti-establishment student protests at the university of california at berkeley , " to clean up the mess at berkeley . "
in his first term , he froze government hiring and approved tax increases to balance the state budget .
shortly after assuming his gubernatorial term , reagan tested the 1968 presidential waters as part of a " stop nixon " movement .
however , by the time of the convention , nixon had 692 delegate votes , 25 more than he needed to secure the nomination , followed by rockefeller with reagan in third place .
reagan was involved in several high-profile conflicts with the protest movements of the era .
on may 15,1969 , during the university 's campus discussing the arab-israeli conflictfully , reagan sent the california highway patrol and other officers to quell the protests .
this led to an incident that became known as bloody thursday , resulting in the death of student james rector and the blinding of carpenter alan blanchard .
reagan then called out 2,200 state national guard troops to occupy the city of berkeley for two weeks to crack down on the protesters .
the guard remained in berkeley for 17 days .
one year after " bloody thursday , " reagan responded to questions about campus protest movements saying , " if it takes a bloodbath , let 's get it over with .
reagan joked to a group of political aides about a botulism outbreak contaminating the food .
in the early stages of the debate , democratic california state senator anthony c . beilenson introduced the " therapeutic abortion act " in an effort to reduce the number of " back-room abortions " performed in california .
the state legislature sent the bill to reagan 's desk .
reagan was in office for four months when he signed the bill .
he later moved to the political career , writing about abortion .
the bill was named after republican assemblyman don mulford .
he was re-elected governor in 1970 .
one of reagan 's greatest frustrations in office was the controversy of capital punishment , which he strongly supported .
the supreme court of california issued their " people v . anderson " decision .
the only execution during reagan 's governorship was on april 12,1967 , when aaron mitchell 's sentence was carried out by the state in san quentin 's gas chamber .
reagan was governor in 1969 , and signed the family law act .
it became the first no-fault divorce law in the united states .
he also strongly advocated the republican ideal of less government regulation of the economy , including that of undue federal taxation .
in 1976 , reagan challenged incumbent president gerald ford to become the republican party 's candidate for president .
reagan soon became the conservative candidate with the support of organizations such as the american conservative union .
reagan 's campaign relied on a strategy made by campaign manager john sears of winning a few primaries early to damage ford 's likely nomination .
the texas campaign helped reagan , when he swept all 96 delegates chosen in the may 1 primary , with four more awaiting at the state convention .
the credit for that victory came from the work of three co-chairmen , including ernest angelo , the mayor of midland , and ray barnhart of houston , whom reagan as president would appoint in 1981 as director of the federal highway administration .
he lost the 1976 presidential election to jimmy carter .
reagan 's concession speech emphasized the dangers of nuclear war and the threat posed by the soviet union .
though he lost the nomination , he received 307 write-in votes in new hampshire , 388 votes as an independent on wyoming 's ballot , and a single electoral vote from a faithless elector in the november election from the state of washington , which ford had won over democratic challenger jimmy carter .
after the campaign , reagan remained in the public debate with the ronald reagan radio commentary series and his political action committee , citizens for the republic .
the 1980 presidential election was between reagan and president jimmy carter .
reagan selected one of his opponents in the primaries , george h . w . bush , to be his running mate .
his relaxed and confident appearance during the televised reagan-carter debate on october 28 , boosted his popularity , and helped to widen his lead in the polls .
republicans also won a majority of seats in the senate for the first time since 1952 .
during his presidency , reagan pursued policies that showed his personal belief in freedom .
reagan kept a diary in which he wrote about his presidency and his views on the issues of the day .
in his inaugural address , reagan himself wrote positively about the country 's economic malaise , arguing : " in this present crisis , government is not the solution to our problems ; government is the problem . "
reagan was the leader of the democratic party , and later the president of the united states , asked him to keep organized prayers to schools .
in 1981 , reagan became the first president to propose a constitutional amendment on school prayer .
reagan 's election was a part of the 1962 supreme court case " engel v . vitale " .
in 1984 , reagan again raised the issue , asking congress “ why can ’ t the freedom to acknowledge god be enjoyed again by children in every schoolroom across this land ? ”
in 1985 , reagan said that the supreme court ruling still banned a moment of silence for public schools .
in 1987 , reagan renewed his call for congress to support voluntary prayers in schools and end " the expulsion of god from america 's classrooms . "
on march 30,1981 , reagan , his press secretary , james brady , washington police officer thomas delahanty , and secret service agent tim mccarthy were struck by gunfire from would-be assassin john hinckley , jr . outside the washington hilton hotel .
reagan was taken to the hospital at george washington university hospital .
he was released from the hospital on april 11,2017 .
reagan said that if the air traffic controllers " do not report for work within 48 hours , they have forfeited their jobs and will be terminated . "
the work also sent a clear message to the private sector that unions no longer needed to be feared .
he also supported returning the united states to some sort of gold standard .
reagan promoted the proposed tax cuts as potentially stimulating the economy enough to expand the tax base .
many people pointed to improvements in certain key economic indicators as evidence of success .
his policy of peace through strength resulted in a record peacetime defense buildup .
during reagan 's presidency , the federal income tax was lowered a lot in the united states .
however , congress passed and reagan signed into law tax increases in every year from 1981 to 1987 .
the increase of the lowest tax bracket from 11 % to 15 % was more than offset by expansion of the personal exemption , standard deduction , and earned income tax credit .
federal income tax receipts increased from 1980 to 1989 .
reagan 's policies suggested that economic growth would occur when the amount of tax was low enough to spur investment .
many poor and minority citizens viewed reagan as indifferent to their struggles .
the idea that reagan 's economic regimen included freezing the minimum wage at $ 3.35 an hour , slashing federal assistance to local governments by 60 % , cutting the budget for public housing and section 8 grant subsidies in half , and eliminating the antipoverty community development program .
the gap between the rich and poor had already begun during the 1970s before reagan 's economic policies took effect .
along with reagan 's 1981 cut in the top regular tax rate on unearned income , he reduced the maximum amount of money to 20 % .
reagan later set tax rates on capital gains at the same level as the rates on ordinary income like salaries and wages , with both topping out at 28 % .
reagan is viewed as an antitax hero despite raising taxes 11 times over the course of his presidency .
reagan opposed to government intervention , and cut the budgets of non-military programs including medicaid , food stamps , federal education programs and the epa .
he was able to protect entitlement programs such as social security and medicare .
a minority of the critics of reaganomics also suggested that the policies partially influenced the stock market crash of 1987 , but there is no consensus about a single source for the crash .
the united states borrowed a lot of money from both the us and abroad .
in 1987 , he appointed monetarist alan greenspan to replace him .
reagan ended the price controls on domestic oil that had contributed to the energy crises of 1973 – 74 and the summer of 1979 .
the price of oil subsequently dropped , and there were no fuel shortages like those in the 1970s .
in 1988 , reagan gave a promise to repeal the windfall profits tax .
some economists think that reagan 's tax policies invigorated america 's economy and contributed to the economic boom of the 1990s .
other economists , such as nobel prize winner robert solow , argue that reagan 's deficits were a major reason his successor , george h . w . bush , reneged on his and resorted to raising taxes .
project socrates , developed and demonstrated the means required for the united states to generate and lead the next evolutionary leap in technology acquisition and utilization for a competitive advantage — automated innovation .
to ensure that the united states got the maximum benefit from automated innovation , reagan , during his second term , had an executive order drafted to create a new federal agency to implement the project socrates results on a nationwide basis .
the bush administration , called project socrates as " industrial policy , " had it ended .
in 1982 , he signed a bill extending the voting rights act for 25 years .
reagan escalated the cold war , accelerating a reversal from the policy of detente that began during the carter administration , following the afghan saur revolution and subsequent soviet invasion .
he created the b-1 lancer program that had been canceled by the carter administration .
but by 2016 , lemann said that the passage represents " a fairly uncontroversial description of what reagan actually did . "
reagan and the prime minister of the united kingdom margaret thatcher both said that the soviet union was in ideological terms .
reagan said : " the forward march of freedom and democracy will leave marxism – leninism on the ash heap of history . "
on march 3,1983 , he predicted that communism would collapse .
after soviet fighters downed korean air lines flight 007 near moneron island on september 1,1983 , carrying 269 people , including georgia congressman larry mcdonald , reagan labeled the act a " massacre " and declared that the soviets had turned " against the world and the moral precepts which guide human relations among people . "
the reagan administration responded to the incident by ending all of the soviet passenger air service to the united states .
reagan announced on september 16,1983 that the global positioning system would be available for civilian use , free of charge , once completed in order to avert similar similar navigational navigational errors in future .
however , in a break from the carter administration policy of arming taiwan under the taiwan relations act , reagan also agreed with the communist government in china to reduce the sale of arms to taiwan .
some of the united states funded armaments introduced then would later pose a threat to u . s . troops in the 2001 war in afghanistan .
in 1982 , this practice enabled the government to purge communists from its ministries , and to virtually eliminate the pro-soviet infrastructure in iran .
in march 1983 , reagan introduced the strategic defense initiative , a defense project that would have used ground-and space-based systems to protect the united states from attack by nuclear ballistic missiles .
there was much disbelief around the program 's scientific feasibility .
the soviets became worried about the possible effects sdi would have .
david gergen , former aide to president reagan , believes that in retrospect , sdi hastened the end of the cold war .
however , critics said that reagan 's foreign policy strategy was essential to protecting u . s . security interests .
the administration was also heavily criticized for backing anti-communist leaders accused of severe human rights violations , such as hissene habre of chad and efrain rios montt of guatemala .
during the 16 months monthslong , montt was president of guatemala .
the previous human rights violations had prompted the united states to cut off aid to the guatemalan government , but the reagan administration appealed to congress to restart military aid .
reagan sent forces to lebanon in 1983 to reduce the threat of the lebanese civil war .
the american peacekeeping forces in beirut were attacked on october 23,1983 .
president reagan also said that there was a small problem with the safety of several hundred american medical students at st . george 's university as adequate reasons to invade .
" operation urgent fury " was the first major military operation that took place in the vietnam war .
he said that it was " morning again in america , " about the recovering economy and the dominating performance by the american athletes at the 1984 summer olympics on home soil , among other things .
following a weak performance in the first presidential debate , reagan 's ability to perform the duties of president for another term was questioned .
his confused and forgetful behavior was evident to his supporters .
reagan won 49 out of the 50 states .
reagan won 525 of the 538 electoral votes .
in terms of electoral votes , this was the second-most lopsided presidential election in modern u . s . history bethel d . roosevelt 's 1936 victory over alfred m . landon .
reagan was sworn in as president on january 20,1985 .
january 21 was one of the coldest days on record in washington , d . c .
in 1982 , reagan began the war on drugs campaign .
reagan had declared a war on drugs .
he said that " drugs were menacing our society " and promised to fight for drug-free schools and workplaces , expanded drug treatment , stronger law enforcement and drug interdiction efforts , and greater public awareness .
the bill was criticized for promoting racial disparities in the prison population .
nancy reagan traveled to 65 cities in 33 states .
the reagan administration largely ignored the aids crisis , which began to unfold in the united states in 1981 .
aids research was underfunded during reagan 's administration .
by the time president reagan had given his first speech on the epidemic , some six years into his presidency , 36,058 americans had been diagnosed with aids and 20,849 had died of it .
other people point out that federal funding for aids-related programs was $ 2.3 billion in 1989 and nearly $ 6 billion total over his presidency .
in september 1985 , reagan said : " this is a top priority with us . . there 's no question about the seriousness of this and the need to find an answer . "
gary bauer , who was reagan 's domestic policy adviser near the end of his second term , argued that reagan 's belief in cabinet government led him to say that reagan was speaking out against aids to his surgeon general and secretary of health and human services .
from the late 1960s onward , the american public grew increasingly vocal in its opposition to apartheid policy of the white-minority government of south africa .
the strong anti-apartheid opposition grew during reagan 's first term in office as its component disinvestment from south africa movement , which gained critical mass following in the united states , particularly on college campuses and among mainline protestant denominations .
reagan opposed to the idea of splitting from the government because , as he wrote in a letter to sammy davis , jr . , it " would hurt the very people we are trying to help and would leave us no contact within south africa to try and bring influence on the government . "
he also noted that the " american-owned industries there employ more than 80,000 blacks " and that their employment practices were " very different from the normal south african customs " .
as an alternative strategy for opposing apartheid , the reagan administration developed a policy of constructive engagement with the south african government as a means of encouraging it to gradually move away from apartheid .
it was part of a larger plan to help peaceful economic development and political change throughout southern africa .
this policy , however , engendered much public criticism and renewed calls for stringent sanctions .
afterwards , reagan reiterated that his administration and " all america " opposed apartheid , and said , " the debate . . was not whether or not to oppose apartheid but , how best to oppose it and how best to bring freedom to that troubled country . "
relations between libya and the united states under president reagan were regularly disputed , beginning with the gulf of sidra incident in 1981 .
in early april 1986 , the berlin discotheque was hurt in the injury of 63 american military personnel and death of one serviceman .
in the late evening of april 15,1986 , the united states launched a series of airstrikes on ground targets in libya .
the uk said that the uk was supporting america 's right to self-defense under article 51 of the united nations charter .
the attack was designed to halt gaddafi 's " ability to export terrorism , offering him " incentives and reasons to alter his criminal behavior . "
the president addressed the nation from the oval office after the attacks started , stating , " when our citizens are attacked or abused anywhere in the world on the direct orders of hostile regimes , we will respond so long as i 'm in this office . "
the united nations general assembly decided that the united nations should not have a vote against against 33 abstentions , and that the united nations would not agree with the agreement .
the act made it illegal to hire or recruit illegal immigrants .
when reagan signed the act at a ceremony held beside the newly refurbished statue of liberty , reagan said , " the legalization provisions in this act will go far to improve the lives of a class of individuals who now must hide in the shadows , without access to many of the benefits of a free and open society .
many of these men and women will be able to step into the sunlight and , ultimately , if they choose , they may become americans .
reagan also said , " the employer sanctions program is the keystone and major element .
in 1986 , the iran – contra affair became a problem for the administration .
the affair became a political scandal in the 1980s .
the united states had violated international law and breached treaties in nicaragua in various ways .
the commission could not find direct evidence that reagan had prior knowledge of the program , but criticized him heavily for his disengagement from managing his staff , making the diversion of funds possible .
congress concluded that " if the president did not know what his national security advisers were doing , he should have . "
the popularity of reagan was declining from 67 % to 46 % in less than a week .
many central americans criticize reagan for his support of the contras .
in 1988 , near the end of the iran – iraq war , the u . s . navy guided missile cruiser accidentally shot down iran air flight 655 killing 290 civilian passengers .
until the early 1980s , the united states had relied on the qualitative superiority of its weapons to frighten the soviets , but the gap had been narrowed .
the soviet union did not make military spending more than the military cost the war .
he was the father of the hydrogen bombarded to build a defense against nuclear weapons .
reagan explained his strategy was an arms buildup that would leave the soviets far behind , with no choice but to negotiate arms reduction .
reagan appreciated the change in the direction of the soviet policy with mikhail gorbachev , and shifted to diplomacy , with a view to encourage the soviet leader to pursue substantial arms agreements .
he and gorbachev held four summit conferences between 1985 and 1988 : the first in geneva , switzerland , the second in reykjavik , iceland , the third in washington , d . c . , and the fourth in moscow .
reagan believed that if he could persuade the soviets to allow for more democracy and free speech , this would lead to reform and the end of communism .
reagan and the chagrin of reagan agreed to end all nuclear weapons .
reagan spoke at the berlin wall on june 12,1987 , when he spoke to gorbachev .
later , in november 1989 , east german authorities began allowing citizens to pass freely through border checkpoints , and began dismantling the wall the next june .
gorbachev signed the intermediate-range nuclear forces treatyricted inf treaty ono at the white house .
reagan asked the united states to start the strategic arms reduction treaty .
in february 1985 , the president of the united states asked reagan to visit a german military cemetery in bitburg and to place a wreath alongside west german chancellor helmut kohl .
a german head of protocol said that no war criminals were buried there .
the ss had many germans drew a distinction between the regular ss , who typically composed of nazi true believers , and the waffen-ss which were attached to military units and composed of conscripted soldiers .
reagan issued a statement that called the nazi soldiers buried in that cemetery as themselves " victims " .
pat buchanan , reagan 's director of communications , argued that the president did not equate the ss members with the actual holocaust , but as victims of the ideology of nazism .
now strongly urged to cancel the visit , the president responded that it would be wrong to back down on a promise he had made to chancellor kohl .
on may 5,1985 , president reagan and chancellor kohl first visited the site of the former nazi bergen-belsen concentration camp and then the bitburg cemetery where , along with two military generals , they did place a wreath .
early in his presidency , reagan started wearing a hearing aid , first in his right ear and later in his left as well .
his decision to go public in 1983 regarding his wearing the small , audio-amplifying device boosted their sales .
reagan underwent surgery on july 13,1985 at bethesda naval hospital .
he gave up his presidential power to the vice president for eight hours .
in august of that year , he underwent an operation to remove skin cancer cells from his nose .
in july of that year , he underwent a third skin cancer operation on his nose .
that opportunity came during his first year in office when associate justice potter stewart retired .
reagan had three opportunities to fill a supreme court vacancy .
the nomination was rejected by a vote of 42 – 58 .
early in his presidency , reagan appointed clarence m . pendleton , jr . as the first african-american to chair the united states commission on civil rights .
pendleton tried to steer the commission into a conservative direction in line with reagan 's views on social and civil rights policy during his tenure from 1981 until his sudden death in 1988 .
pendleton soon aroused the ire of many civil rights advocates and feminists .
reagan was assaulted by an anti-nuclear protester during luncheon speech on april 13,1992 .
following his arrest on assault charges , a secret service spokesman could not explain how springer got past the agents who guarded reagan 's life at all times .
after leaving office in 1989 , the reagans bought a home in bel air , los angeles , in addition to the reagan ranch in santa barbara .
it was dedicated to the public on november 4,1991 .
the brady bill was a constitutional amendment requiring a balanced budget .
in 1994 , reagan was diagnosed with alzheimer 's disease .
there was also speculation that reagan had showed symptoms of mental degeneration .
reagan greeted his secretary of housing and urban development samuel pierce by saying " how are you , mr . mayor ?
former cbs white house correspondent lesley stahl remembers that in her final meeting with the president in 1986 , reagan did not seem to know who stahl was .
stahl came close to reporting that reagan was senile , but at the end of the meeting , he regained his alertness .
all four of reagan 's white house doctors said that they saw no evidence of alzheimer 's while he was president .
daniel ruge , a neurosurgeon who served as physician to the president from 1981 to 1985 , said that he never detected signs of the disease while speaking almost every day with reagan .
after being thrown from a horse in mexico , a subdural hematoma was found and surgically treated later in the year .
nancy reagan said that her husband 's 1989 fall hastened the onset of alzheimer 's disease .
he took walks through parks near his home and on beaches , played golf regularly , and until 1999 he often went to his office in nearby century city .
reagan 's public appearances became much less frequent with the progression of the disease .
she told cnn 's larry king in 2001 that very few visitors were allowed to see her husband because she felt that " ronnie would want people to remember him as he was . "
after her husband 's diagnosis and death , nancy became a stem-cell research advocate .
reagan died of pneumonia complicated by alzheimer 's disease in los angeles , california , aged 85 .
a short time after his death , nancy reagan released a statement saying , " my family and i would like the world to know that president ronald reagan has died after 10 years of alzheimer 's disease at 93 years of age .
speaking in paris , france , president george w . bush called reagan 's death " a sad hour in the life of america . "
reagan 's body was taken to the kingsley and gates funeral home in santa monica , california .
on june 7 , his body was transferred to the ronald reagan presidential library .
on june 9 , reagan 's body was flown to washington , dc .
on june 11 , a state funeral was held in washington national cathedral , presided over by president george w . bush .
mikhail gorbachev and many world leaders , including prince charles , representing his mother queen elizabeth ii , german chancellor gerhard schroder , italian prime minister silvio berlusconi , and interim presidents hamid karzai of afghanistan and ghazi al-yawer of iraq .
after the funeral , reagan was flown back to the ronald w . reagan presidential library in simi valley , california .
reagan 's burial site is inscribed with the words he delivered at the opening of the ronald reagan presidential library : " i know in my heart that man is good , that what is right will always eventually triumph and that there is purpose and worth to each and every life " .
supporters have pointed to a more efficient and prosperous economy as a result of reagan 's economic policies , foreign policy triumphs including a peaceful end to the cold war , and restoration of american pride and morale .
they say that he had an unabated and passionate love for the united states which restored faith in the american dream , after a decline in american confidence and self-respect under jimmy carter 's perceived weak leadership , particularly during the iran hostage crisis , as well as his gloomy , dreary outlook for the future of the united states during the 1980 election .
they also said that the iran – contra affair made the credibility of the united states .
president of the heritage foundation , edwin feulner , said that reagan " helped create a safer , freer world " and said of his economic policies : " he took an america suffering from ' malaise ' . . and made its citizens believe again in their destiny . "
however , mark weisbrot , co-director of the center for economic and policy research , contended that reagan 's " economic policies were mostly a failure " while howard kurtz of " the washington post " opined that reagan was " a far more controversial figure in his time than the largely gushing obits on television would suggest . "
despite the continuing debate surrounding his legacy , many conservative and liberal scholars agree that reagan has been the most influential president since franklin d . roosevelt .
since he left office , historians have reached a consensus , as presented by british historian m . j . heale , who finds that reagan rehabilitated conservatism , turned the nation to the right , practiced a considerably pragmatic conservatism that balanced ideology and the constraints of exceptionalism , faith in the cold war and exceptionalism .
reagan 's major achievement was that the ussr and communism collapsed , causing the u . s . to become the world 's only superpower .
after 40 years of high tension , the ussr pulled back in the last years of reagan 's second term .
reagan 's exact role is debated , with many believing that reagan 's defense policies , economic policies , military policies and hard-line rhetoric against the soviet union and communism-together with his summits with general secretary gorbachev .
he was the first president to reject containment and detente .
general secretary gorbachev said that he was a man who was important in bringing about the end of the cold war , and said that he was " a great president . "
gorbachev does not acknowledge a win or loss in the war , but rather a peaceful end ; he said he was not intimidated by reagan 's harsh rhetoric .
thatcher said that the soviet union had an insatiable drive for military power .
former president lech wałesa of poland acknowledged , " reagan was one of the world leaders who made a major contribution to communism 's collapse . "
professor jeffrey knopf has argued that reagan 's leadership was one of the causes of the end of the cold war .
president harry s . truman 's policy of containment was also regarded as a force behind the fall of the ussr , and the soviet invasion of afghanistan undermined the soviet system .
reagan reshaped the republican party , led the modern conservative movement , and changed the political dynamic of the united states .
this was the highest rating for a departing president in the modern era .
the 2008 republican presidential candidates were no exception .
republican nominee john mccain frequently said that he came to office as “ a foot soldier in the reagan revolution . ”
reagan 's most famous statement regarding the role of smaller government was that " government is not a solution to our problem , government is the problem " .
the period of american history most dominated by reagan and his policies concerned taxes , welfare , defense , the federal judiciary and the cold war is known today as the reagan era .
this time period emphasized that the conservative " reagan revolution " led by reagan , had a permanent impact on the united states in domestic and foreign policy .
the bill clinton administration is often treated as an extension of the reagan era , as is the george w . bush administration .
historian eric foner noted that the obama candidacy in 2008 " aroused a great deal of wishful thinking among those yearning for a change after nearly thirty years of reaganism . "
according to chuck raasch , " reagan transformed the presidency in ways that only a few have been able to . "
he defined the political agenda of the times , and suggested lower taxes , a conservative economic philosophy , and a stronger military .
his role in the cold war made his image as a different kind of leader .
gallup polls in 2001 and 2007 ranked him number one or number two when correspondents were asked for the greatest president in history .
in a siena college survey of over 200 historians , however , reagan ranked sixteenth out of 42 .
while the debate about reagan 's legacy is ongoing , the 2009 annual " c-span survey of presidential leaders " ranked reagan the 10th greatest president .
reagan 's ability to talk about real issues with understandable terms and to focus on mainstream american concerns earned him the nickname " the great communicator . "
reagan earned the nickname " the teflon president " .
according to colorado congresswoman patricia schroeder , who coined the phrase , and reporter howard kurtz , the name referred to reagan 's ability to " do almost anything wrong and not get blamed for it . "
he was the oldest president up to that time .
he was the first president to have been divorced .
the combination of reagan 's speaking style , unabashed patriotism , negotiation skills , as well as his use of the media , played an important role in defining the 1980s and his future legacy .
reagan made the following joke : " my fellow americans , i 'm pleased to tell you today that i 've signed legislation that will outlaw russia forever .
reagan addressed the nation .
reagan received many awards in his pre-and post-presidential years .
reagan was elected into the national speakers association speaker hall of fame .
in 1981 , reagan was honored as a laureate of the lincoln academy of illinois .
in 1982 , he was given the distinguished service medal from the american legion .
in 1989 , reagan was made an honorary knight grand cross of the order of the bath , one of the highest british orders giving him to use of the post-nominal letters " gcb " but as a foreign national , not to be known as " sir ronald reagan " ; only two u . s . presidents have received this honor since then .
japan awarded him the grand cordon of the order of the chrysanthemum in 1989 .
in 1990 , reagan was awarded the wppac 's top honor prize because he signed the intermediate-range nuclear forces treaty with h . e .
on january 18,1993 , reagan received the presidential medal of freedom recipients with distinctionrford .
in 1998 , the u . s . navy memorial foundation awarded reagan its naval heritage award for his support of the u . s . navy and military in both his movie career and while he served as president .
the house was approved by congress to allow the ronald reagan boyhood home in dixon , illinois in 2002 pending federal purchase of the property .
on may 16 , reagan received the congressional gold medal .
later in the year , cnn , along with the editors of " time " magazine , named him the " most fascinating person " of the network 's first 25 years .
the discovery channel asked its viewers to vote for the greatest american in june 2005 .
in 2007 , president lech kaczynski gave reagan the order of the white eagle .
after reagan 's death , both major american political parties agreed to erect a statue of reagan in the place of thomas starr king .
president obama signed the ronald reagan centennial commission act into law .
former secretary of state condoleezza rice took her place and read a statement on her behalf .
during reagan 's presidency , margaret thatcher , was also unable to attend due to poor health .
