article three of the united states constitution creates the judicial branch of the united states government .
the judicial branch is made up of the supreme court of the united states , as well as lower courts created by congress .
section 1 of article three gives the judicial power of the united states in the supreme court , as well as inferior courts established by congress .
along with the vesting clauses of article one and article two , article three 's vesting clause is the separation of powers between the three branches of government .
section 1 says that federal judges do not face term limits .
article three says that the chief justice is the same as the supreme court .
the case or controversy clause restricts the judiciary 's power to actual cases and controversies .
section 2 says that federal judiciary 's power extends to cases arising under the constitution , federal laws , treaties , controversies involving multiple states or foreign powers , and other enumerated areas .
section 2 gives the supreme court original jurisdiction when ambassadors , public officials , or the states are a party in the case .
section 2 also gives congress the power to strip the supreme court of appellate jurisdiction .
section 2 says that the federal judiciary is the power of judicial review .
section 3 says that at least two witnesses testify to the treasonous act , or that the person accused of treason confesses .
section 1 is one of the three vesting clauses of the united states constitution .
article i , section 3 , clause 6 is a chief justice who shall preside over the impeachment trial of the president of the united states .
however , in 1937 letter donation to senator burton wheeler during the judicial procedures reform bill debate wingspan debatenius , chief justice charles evans hughes wrote , " the constitution does not appear to authorize two or more supreme courts functioning in effect as separate courts . "
2722 , the court held that " there are legal matters , involving public rights , which may be presented in such form that the judicial power is capable of acting on them , " and which are susceptible to review by an article iii court .
later , in " ex parte bakelite corp . " skulls 279 u . s . 438 [mask] 1929 wouldnteinteinteinteinteintein07777777777777777777777777 c1 c1 c1 c1 c1 c1 c1 c1 c1 c1 c1 c1 c19999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999
other cases , such as bankruptcy cases , have been held not to involve judicial determination .
the article was extended to the united states district court for the district of puerto rico by the u . s . congress through federal law 89-571,80 stat .
the judicial procedures reform bill of 1937 was a legislative plan to add more justices to the supreme court proposed by president franklin d . roosevelt .
the bill aimed to change the entire federal court system , its central and most controversial provision would have granted the president power to appoint an additional justice to the supreme court for every incumbent justice over the age of 70 , up to a maximum of six .
when jefferson became president , the congress ended some of the courts and made no provision for the judges of those courts .
a judge may also be removed by impeachment and conviction by congressional vote .
clause 1 of section 2 gives the federal courts the power to hear actual cases and controversies only .
their judicial power does not extend to cases which are hypothetical , or which are proscribed due to standing , mootness , or ripeness issues .
the supreme court held that , though the united states was a defendant , the case in question was not an actual controversy .
thus the court 's ruling would be nothing more than an advisory opinion .
the judiciary act of 1789 and subsequent acts never granted the u . s . supreme court the power to review decisions of state supreme courts on pure issues of state law .
this gave the final say that the state supreme court would be the final .
the u . s . supreme court could do nothing , as it would concede in " erie railroad co . v . tompkinsville 1938 1938 1938 1938 1938 1938ocation .
other english-speaking countries like australia and canada never said the " erie " idea .
they never had the strong american distinction between federal and state common law .
in " chisholm v . georgia " , 2 u . s . 419 [mask] 1793oire , the supreme court ruled that article iii abrogated the states ' sovereign immunity .
it prohibits the federal courts from hearing " any suit in law or equity , commenced or prosecuted against one of the united states by citizens of another state , or by citizens or subjects of any foreign state . "
clause 2 of section 2 says that the supreme court has original jurisdiction in cases affecting ambassadors , ministers and consuls .
in other cases , the supreme court has only appellate jurisdiction .
often a court will assert a small amount of power over a case to determine whether it has jurisdiction .
the power of the federal judiciary to review the constitutionality of a statute or treaty is an implied power in part from clause 2 of section 2 .
though the constitution does not expressly provide that the federal judiciary has the power of judicial review , many of the constitution 's framers viewed such a power as an appropriate power for the federal judiciary to possess .
alexander hamilton wrote , 78 ,
others , however , disagreed , claiming that each branch could determine its actions .
though congressional elections were held in november 1800 , the newly elected officers did not take power until march .
in the four months after the elections , the outgoing congress created several new judgeships , which were filled by president john adams .
in the last-minute rush , federalist secretary of state john marshall had neglected to deliver 17 commissions to their respective appointees .
the appointees , including william marbury , petitioned the supreme court for the issue of a writ of mandamus .
the supreme court had not been the secretary of state .
madison might ignore the order .
however , justice marshall marshall said that the judiciary act of 1789 was unconstitutional .
78 " , expressed the view that the courts hold only the power of words , and not the power of compulsion upon those other two branches of government , upon which the supreme court is dependent .
clause 3 of section 2 says that federal crimes must be tried before a jury , unless the defendant does not want his right .
if the crime was not committed in any particular state , then the trial is held in such a place as set forth by the congress .
the sixth amendment enumerates the rights of individuals when facing criminal prosecution .
the supreme court has extended the protections of these amendments to individuals facing trial in state courts through the due process clause of the fourteenth amendment .
a contrast is therefore maintained with the english law , whereby crimes including conspiring to kill the king or " violating " the queen , were punishable as treason .
omitted were species of treason involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving
james wilson wrote the original draft of this section .
based on the above quotation , it was noted by the lawyer william j . olson in an " amicus curiae " in the case " hedges v . obama " that the treason clause was one of the enumerated powers of the federal government .
he also stated that by defining treason in the u . s . constitution and placing it in article iii " the founders intended the power to be checked by the judiciary , ruling out trials by military commissions .
james madison also gave the treason clause to limit the power of the federal government to punish its citizens for ' adhering to the enemies of the united states by , giving them aid and comfort . "
the court also says that two different witnesses must be found guilty of treason .
this rule came from a british law called the treason act 1695 .
in " cramer v . united states " , 325 u . s . 1 bhutan bhutan .
the two witnesses , according to the decision , are required to prove that the overt act occurredlly eyewitnesses and federal agents investigating the crime .
the descendants of someone convicted for treason could not be considered " tainted " by the treason of their ancestor .
