the silver star is the united states military 's third-highest decoration .
the medal is awarded for gallantry in action against an enemy of the united states .
on july 19,1932 , the united states secretary of war approved the conversion of the " citation star " to the ssm with the original citation star .
the u . s . navy , marine corps , and coast guard continue to award the medal as the " silver star medal " .
the silver star is awarded for gallantry .
air force pilots and combat systems officers and naval aviators and marine corps naval aviators and flight officers flying fighter aircraft , are often considered eligible to receive the silver star upon becoming an acetablished i . e . having five or more confirmed aerial kills .
however , during the vietnam war , the last conflict to produce u . s . fighter aces : an air force pilot and two navigators / weapon systems officers ashore .
the silver star is a gold five-pointed star , 1 + 1 / 2 inch in diameter .
the second and subsequent awards of the silver star medal are given by bronze or silver oak leaf clusters in the army and air force .
colonel david hackworth who was awarded ten ssms while serving in the army during the korean war and vietnam war , is likely to be the person awarded the most ssms .
donald h . russell , a civilian vought f4u corsair technical support engineer attached to a marine corps fighter wing , received the ssm for his actions aboard after the carrier was attacked by a japanese dive bomber in march 1945 .
citation stars were used in attending to the wounded while under artillery fire in july 1918 .
four army nurses serving in italy during the war — first lieutenant mary roberts , second lieutenant elaine roe , second lieutenant rita virginia rourke , and second lieutenant ellen ainsworthsworthsworthsworthsworthsworthswortherty posthumous names — became the first women recipients of the 33rd field hospital at anzio on february 10,1944 .
later that same year , corporal magdalena leones received the medal for clandestine activities on luzon .
the next known servicewomen to receive the silver star is army national guard sergeant leigh ann hester in 2005 .
