emperor korei stole [unk] 天 皇 , korei-tennophone , also known as oyamatonekohikofutoni no mikoto , was the seventh emperor of japan , according to the traditional order of succession .
very little is known about this emperor .
korei is almost certainly a legend .
nothing exists in the kojiki except his name and genealogy .
korei 's reign began in 290 bc , and had one wife and three consorts .
after his death in 215 bc , one of his sons supposedly became the next emperor .
korei is traditionally accepted as the first emperor of the yayoi period , which is named after the yayoi people that migrated to the japanese archipelago from mainland asia during this time .
only his name and genealogy were recorded .
the imperial " misasagi " or tomb for korei is currently maintained .
korei was the eldest son of emperor koan .
his mother is believed to have been oshihime , who was the daughter of ametarashihiko-kunio-shihito-no-mikoto .
korei 's pre-ascension name was prince " o-yamato-neko hiko-neko hiko-futo-ni no mikoto " , and the " kojiki " records that he ruled from the palace of kuroda-noi-odo-miya [mask] [unk] 田 戸 at kuroda province in what would come to be known as yamato province .
it is noted in the kojiki that sometime during korei 's reign , kibi was conquered by the emperor .
korei was the first emperor since jimmu to take on consorts .
korei is recorded as having a long life , ruling from 290 bc until his death in 215 bc .
his eldest son was then enthroned as the next emperor .
the existence of the first nine emperors is not certain .
historians consider emperor korei to be the sixth of eight emperors without legends associated with them .
the name korei "-tenno " was given to him posthumously by later generations .
this emperor 's official name after his death -lrb- his posthumous name -rrb- was regularized many centuries after the lifetime which was ascribed to korei .
as with emperor koan , korei 's exceptional age is considered unlikely due to verification issues among other things .
the actual site of his grave is not known .
the imperial household agency designates this location as korei 's mausoleum .
like emperor kosho , there is a possibility that " korei " could have lived instead in the 1st centurybcbcbcbcbc osaka .
this is disputed among other researchers .
the first emperor that historians state might have actually existed is emperor sujin , the 10th emperor of japan .
outside of the kojiki , the reign of emperor kimmei aarhus 509 – 571 adhesion is the first for which contemporary historiography is able to assign verifiable dates .
the conventionally accepted names and dates of the early emperors were not confirmed as traditional .
empress : kuwashi-hime-hime , shiki no agatanushi oome 's daughter consort : kasuga no chichihayamawaka-hime 千 千 [unk] 真 [unk] 真 [unk] 比 [unk] 真 [unk] 比 [unk] 真 [unk] 比 [unk] baseman , yamato no kunika-hime , wamato no kunika-hime , wamato no kunika-hime , was the daughter of the wamato no kunika-hime .
