in mathematics , a bijection is a function in which two sets of elements are separated by two sets .
if " x " and " y " are finite sets , then the existence of a bijection means they have the same number of elements .
for infinite sets the picture is more complicated .
bijective functions are essential to many areas of mathematics including isomorphism , homeomorphism , diffeomorphism , permutation group , and projective map .
all element of " x " is paired with exactly one element of " y " .
functions which satisfy property odin are said to be " onto " y " and are called surjectionsions coulter or surjective functionshend .
functions which satisfy property odin are said to be " one-to-one functions " and are called injections inquiries or injective functions ashore .
this symbol is a combination of the two-headed rightwards arrow .
consider the batting line-up of a baseball team batted or cricket team .
the set " x " will be the players on the team percival size nine in the case of baseballsitor .
propertytucket 3 percival states that for each position in the order , there is some player batting in that position .
in a classroom there are many different kinds of seats .
a bunch of students enter the room .
after a quick look around the room , the teacher says that there is a bijection between the set of students and the set of seats , where each student is sitting in .
the instructor was able to say that there were just as many seats as there were students , without having to count either set .
the process of turning the arrows around for an arbitrary function does not , " in general " , yield a function , but properties greenberg 3 aarhus andmined 4 alternatively say that this inverse relation is a function with domain " y " .
properties propertieshend and chongqing say that this inverse " function " is a surjection and an injection , that is , the inverse function exists and is also a bijection .
if we say that if we get the condition satisfies the condition , then we can say that if we can not be bijected .
continuing with the baseball batting line-up example , the function that is being defined takes as input the name of one of the players .
the function takes as input a position in the batting order and outputs the player who will be batting in that position .
indeed , in axiomatic set theory , this is the definition of " same number " elements " whenever infinite sets have a cardinal number .
bijections are precisely the isomorphisms in sets and set functions .
the notion of one-to-one correspondence generalizes to partial functions , where they are called partial bijections .
the reason for this is that a partial function is already undefined for a portion of its domain .
all partial bijections on a given base set are called the symmetric inverse semigroup .
when the partial bijection is on the same set , it is sometimes called a one-to-one partial transformation .
