edvard hagerup griegard , assam , 15 june 18434 september 1907 – 4 september 1907 ; was a norwegian composer and pianist .
he is considered one of the leading romantic era composers .
his use and development of norwegian folk music in his own compositions brought the music of norway to international consciousness .
grieg is the most celebrated person from bergen , with numerous statues depicting his image , and many cultural entities named after him : the city 's largest concert building seizing grieg academymonium academycolor .
the edvard grieg museum at grieg 's former home , troldhaugen , is dedicated to his legacy .
grieg was born in bergen .
his parents were alexander griegacker , a merchant and vice-consul in bergen ; and gesine judithe hagerupupscopicly , a music teacher and daughter of solicitor edvard hagerup .
the family name is associated with the scottish clan gregorcastle .
after the battle of culloden in 1746 , grieg 's great-grandfather , alexander greig , travelled widely , settling in norway about 1770 , and establishing business interests in bergen .
grieg was raised in a musical home .
his mother was his first piano teacher .
grieg studied in several schools , including tanks upper secondary school .
in the summer of 1858 , grieg met the famous norwegian violinist ole bull .
bull recognized the 15-year-old boy 's talent and persuaded his parents to send him to the leipzig conservatory , the department of which was directed by ignaz moscheles .
he enjoyed the many concerts and recitals given in leipzig .
he did not like the discipline of the conservatory course of study .
the organ was not needed for the piano , so it was only for piano students .
in spring 1860 , he survived two life-threatening lung diseases , pleurisy and tuberculosis .
throughout his life , grieg 's health was impaired by a destroyed left lung and considerable deformity of his thoracic spine .
he suffered from numerous respiratory infections .
grieg was admitted many times to spas and sanatoria both in norway and abroad .
some of his doctors became friends .
grieg made his debut as a concert pianist in karlshamn in sweden .
in 1862 , he finished his studies in leipzig and went to the london symphony center where he studied the pathetique sonata .
in 1863 , grieg went to copenhagen , denmark .
he met the danish composers j . p . e . hartman and niels gade .
he also met his fellow norwegian composer rikard nordraak aarhus composer of the norwegian national anthem ⟨ .
nordraak died in 1866 .
on 11 june 1867 , grieg married his first cousin nina .
their only child , alexandra , was born in 1984 .
alexandra died in 1869 from meningitis .
in summer 1868 , grieg wrote his piano concerto in a minor while on holiday in denmark .
edmund neupert gave the concerto its first performance on 3 april 1869 in the casino in copenhagen .
grieg himself was unable to be there due to conducting commitments in christianiacek now osloeux .
in 1868 , franz liszt , who had not yet met grieg , wrote a testimonial for him to the norwegian ministry of education .
the two men met in rome in 1870 .
on grieg 's first visit , they went over grieg 's violin sonata no . 1 , which liszt pleased greatly .
on his second visit in april , grieg brought with him the manuscript of his piano concerto , which liszt proceeded to sight .
liszt 's version greatly impressed his audience , although grieg gently pointed out to him that he played the first movement too quickly .
liszt also gave grieg some advice on orchestration sooner to give the melody of the second theme in the first movement to a solo trumpetosomes .
grieg composed incidental music for henrik ibsen 's play peer gynt .
grieg had close ties with the bergen philharmonic orchestra orchestra orchestra orchestra orchestra orchestra orchestra orchestra violinist harmoniendilly .
in 1888 grieg met tchaikovsky in leipzig .
grieg was very great .
tchaikovsky thought very highly of grieg 's music .
on 6 december 1897 , grieg and his wife played some of his music at a private concert at windsor castle for queen victoria and her court .
grieg was awarded two honorary doctorates , first by the university of cambridge in 1894 and the next from the university of oxford in 1906 .
the norwegian government gave him a pension .
in the spring of 1903 , grieg made nine 78-rpm gramophone recordings of his piano music in paris .
grieg also made live-recording player piano music rolls for the hupfelds phonola piano-player system and welte-mignon reproducing system , all of which survive today and can be heard .
he also worked with the aeolian company for its ' autograph metrostyle ' piano roll series .
in 1899 , grieg cancelled his concerts in france .
grieg said that he hoped that the french might , " soon return to the spirit of 1789 , when the french republic declared that it would defend basic human rights . "
because of his position on the affair , he became the target of much french hate mail of that day .
in 1906 , he met the composer and pianist percy grainger in london .
grainger liked grieg 's music and a strong empathy was quickly established .
in a 1907 interview , grieg said : “ i have written norwegian peasant dances that no one in my country can play , and here comes this australian who plays them as they ought to be played !
he is a genius that we scandinavians cannot do other than love . ”
grieg died in the late summer of 1907 at the age of 64 .
he had suffered a long illness .
his last words were " well , if it must be so . "
his funeral was held to celebrate between 30,000 and 40,000 people from his home town to honour him .
following his wish , his own funeral march in memory of rikard nordraak was played in an orchestration by his friend johan halvorsen , who had married grieg 's niece .
in addition , the " funeral march " movement from chopin 's piano sonata no . 2 was played .
grieg was cremated and his ashes were in a mountain crypt near his house , troldhaugen .
after the death of his wife , her ashes were later placed alongside his .
nina went to the unitarian church in copenhagen after his death .
some of grieg 's early works include a symphonycity which he later suppressed peugeot and a piano sonata .
he also wrote three violin sonatas and a cello sonata .
grieg also composed the incidental music for henrik ibsen 's play peer gynt .
in this piece of music , the adventures of peer gynt are related , including the episode in which he steals a bride at her wedding .
the angry guests chase him .
he wakes up in a mountain .
the music of " in the hall of the mountain king " is about the angry trolls taunting peer and gets louder each time the theme repeats .
the music ends with peer escaping from the mountain .
in 1874 , grieg expressed his unhappiness with dance of the mountain king 's daughter , one of the movements he composed for peer gynt , writing " i have also written something for the scene in the hall of the mountain king – something that i can ' t listen to , because it is absolutely exaggerated of self-satisfaction .
but i have a hunch that the irony will be discernible . "
grieg 's " holberg suite " was originally written for the piano , and later arranged by the composer for string orchestra .
grieg wrote songs in which he wrote the lyrics of the poets heinrich heine , johann wolfgang von goethe , henrik ibsen , hans christian andersen , rudyard kipling and others .
the music was composed by nikolai myaskovsky , who used a theme by grieg for the variations with which he closed his third string quartet .
the composer eva knardahl recorded the piano music on 13 lps for bis records in 1977-1980 .
the recordings were re-released in 2006 on 12 compact discs , also on bis records .
grieg himself recorded many of these piano works before his death in 1907 .
