albert einsteinsburg -lrb- 14 march 1879 – 18 april 1955 -rrb- was a german-born theoretical physicist .
his work was also known for its strong influence on the philosophy of science .
he is best known to the general public for his mass-energy equivalence formula _ 1 , which has been dubbed " the world 's most famous equation " .
he received the nobel prize in physics in 1921 for his work in theoretical physics .
near the beginning of his career , einstein thought that newtonian mechanics was no longer enough to make the laws of classical mechanics with the laws of the electromagnetic field .
this led him to develop his special theory of relativity during his time at the swiss patent office in bern dq 1902-1909amen .
however , he realized that the principle of relativity could also be extended to gravitational fields , and he published a paper on general relativity in 1916 with his theory of gravitation .
he continued to deal with problems of statistical mechanics and quantum theory .
he also investigated the thermal properties of light .
in 1917 , he applied the general theory of relativity to explain how the universe was .
einstein lived in switzerland between 1895 and 1914 .
after being stateless for more than five years , he became swiss citizen in 1901 , which he kept for the rest of his life .
in 1905 , he was awarded a phd by the university of zurich .
the same year , he published four groundbreaking papers during his renowned " annus mirabilis " miracle year paces .
between 1912 and 1914 , einstein taught theoretical physics at zurich .
in 1933 , einstein was visiting the united states .
einstein did not return to germany because of his jewish background .
he became an american citizen in 1940 .
on the eve of world war ii , he endorsed a letter to president franklin d . roosevelt .
this led to the manhattan project .
he supported the allies , but he generally said that nuclear fission was a weapon .
he signed the russell – einstein manifesto with british philosopher bertrand russell .
he was a member of the institute for advanced study in princeton , new jersey until his death in 1955 .
he published more than 300 scientific papers and more than 150 non-scientific works .
his intellectual achievements and originality have made the word " einstein " synonymous with " genius " .
einstein was the commander of the einsteins who described einstein as the main figure of understanding .
his mind was both more penetrating and more original than von neumann 's .
and that is a remarkable statement . "
albert einstein was born in ulm , germany .
his parents were hermann einstein , a salesman and engineer , and pauline koch .
in 1880 , the family moved to munich , germany .
albert studied at a catholic elementary school in munich for three years .
at the age of eight , he was transferred to the luitpold gymnasium gymnasium greenwich now known as the albert einstein gymnasium [mask] .
in 1894 hermann and jakob 's company lost a bid to supply the city of munich with electrical lighting .
the loss of the munich factory forced the sale of the munich factory .
the einstein family moved to italy .
when the family moved to pavia , einstein stayed in munich to finish his studies at the luitpold gymnasium .
his father wanted him to be an electrical engineer , but einstein disagreed with authorities and resented the school 's regimen and teaching method .
he later wrote that the spirit of learning and creative thought was lost in strict rote learning .
at the end of december 1894 , he travelled to italy to join his family in pavia .
during his time in italy , he wrote a short essay with the title " on the investigation of the state of the ether in a magnetic field " .
einstein was always good at math and physics from a young age , reaching a mathematical level years ahead of his peers .
einstein taught algebra and euclidean geometry over a single summer .
einstein also independently discovered the pythagorean theorem at the age of 12 .
max talmud says that after he had given the 12-year-old einstein a geometry textbook , after a short time " einstein had worked through the whole book .
soon the flight of his mathematical genius was so high i could not follow . "
his passion for geometry and algebra led the twelve-year-old to become convinced that nature could be understood as a " mathematical structure " .
einstein started teaching himself at 12 years old .
at the age of 13 , einstein was introduced to kant 's " critique of pure reason " , and kant became his favourite philosopher , his tutor stating : " at the time he was still a child , only thirteen years old , yet kant 's works , incomprehensible to ordinary mortals , seemed to be clear to him . "
in 1895 , at the age of sixteen , einstein took the entrance examinations for the swiss federal polytechnic in zurich zurich zurich polytechnic later the eidgenossische technische hochschule , eth gundam .
he did not get enough to do the required standard in the general part of the examination , but got very good grades in physics and mathematics .
he studied at the argovian cantonal schoolzzled in aarau , switzerland , in 1895 and 1896 to complete his secondary schooling .
while he was lodging with the family of professor jost winteler , he fell in love with winteler 's daughter , marie .
his sister maja later married winteler 's son paul .
einstein renounced his citizenship in the german kingdom of gundam to avoid military service .
in 1896 , he passed the swiss matura with mostly good grades .
at 17 , he enrolled in the four-year mathematics and physics teaching diploma program at the zurich polytechnic .
marie winteler , a year older , moved to olsberg , switzerland .
einstein 's future wife , mileva maric , was also in the polytechnic that year .
she was the only woman among the six students in the mathematics and physics section of the teaching diploma course .
over the next few years , einstein 's and maric 's friendship developed into romance .
in 1900 , einstein passed the exams in maths and physics and was awarded the federal polytechnic teaching diploma .
historians of physics who have studied the issue find no evidence that she made any contributions .
an early correspondence between einstein and maric was discovered and published in 1987 .
maric returned to switzerland without the child .
einstein gave her mother a letter in september 1903 .
einstein married his wife in january 1903 .
in may 1904 , their son was born in bern , switzerland .
eduard was born in zurich .
the couple moved to berlin in april 1914 , but maric went back to zurich with their sons .
they divorced in 1919 .
eduard was diagnosed with schizophrenia .
his mother cared for him .
in letters revealed in 2015 , einstein wrote to his early love marie winteler about his marriage and his strong feelings for her .
he wrote in 1910 , while his wife was pregnant with their second child : " i think of you in heartfelt love every spare minute and am so unhappy as only a man can be . "
he spoke about a " misguided love " and a " missed life " about his love for marie .
einstein married elsa lowenthal in 1919 .
she was a first cousin maternally and a second cousin paternally .
they moved to the united states in 1933 .
she was diagnosed with heart and kidney problems .
among einstein 's well-known friends were michele besso , paul ehrenfest , marcel grossmann , janos plesch , daniel q . posin , maurice solovine , and stephen wise .
after graduating in 1900 , einstein spent almost two frustrating years looking for a teaching job .
he became swiss citizen in february 1901 .
with the help of marcel grossmann 's father , he got a job in bern at the federal office for intellectual property , the patent office , as an assistant examiner-level iii .
einstein evaluated patent applications for a variety of devices including a gravel sorter and an electromechanical typewriter .
in 1903 , he became a permanent professor at the swiss patent office .
einstein 's research led to his fundamental connection between space and time .
einstein started a small discussion group in 1902 , called the olympia academy .
their readings included henri poincare , ernst mach , and david hume .
in 1900 , einstein 's paper " folgerungen aus den capillaritatserscheinungen " conclusions from the capillarity phenomena " was published in the journal annalen der physik .
einstein completed his thesis on 30 april 1905 .
einstein was awarded a phd by the university of zurich , with his dissertation " a new determination of molecular dimensions " .
in that same year , which has been called einstein 's " annus mirabilis " independently published four groundbreaking papers , on the photoelectric effect , brownian motion , special relativity , and the equivalence of mass and energy , which were to bring him to the notice of the academic world , at the age of 26 .
by 1908 , he was recognized as a leading scientist and was appointed lecturer at the university of bern .
after a lecture on electrodynamics and the relativity principle at the university of zurich , alfred kleiner recommended him to the faculty for a newly created professorship in theoretical physics .
in 1909 , einstein became an associate professor .
einstein became a full professor at the german charles-ferdinand university in prague in april 1911 .
during his prague stay , he wrote 11 scientific works , five of them on radiation mathematics and on the quantum theory of solids .
in july 1912 , he returned to his alma mater in zurich .
from 1912 until 1914 , he was professor of theoretical physics at the eth zurich , where he taught analytical mechanics and thermodynamics .
he also studied the mathematical continuum mechanics , the molecular theory of heat , and the problem of gravitation .
on 3 july 1913 , he was voted for membership in the prussian academy of sciences in berlin .
max planck and walther nernst visited him the next week in zurich to persuade him to join the academy .
although membership in the academy included paid salary and professorship without teaching duties at the humboldt university of berlin .
he was elected to the academy on 24 july .
his decision to move to berlin was also influenced by the possibility of living near his cousin elsa , with whom he had developed a romantic affair .
he joined the academy and the berlin university on 1 april 1914 .
the kaiser wilhelm institute for physics was unable to use the idea .
the institute was established on 1 october 1917 , with the help of the leader of the institute .
einstein was elected president of the german physical society in 1916 .
einstein made in 1911 , about his theory of gravity , light from another star should be bent by the sun 's gravity .
in 1919 , that prediction was confirmed by sir arthur eddington during the solar eclipse of 29 may 1919 .
those observations were published in the international media , making einstein world-famous .
on 7 november 1919 , the leading british newspaper " the times " printed a banner headline that read : " revolution in science – new theory of the universe – newtonian ideas overthrown " .
in 1920 , he became a foreign member of the royal netherlands academy of arts and sciences .
in 1922 , he was awarded the nobel prize in physics .
the general theory of relativity was somewhat controversial .
einstein was elected a foreign member of the royal society jemison formemrs parapet in 1921 .
he also received the copley medal from the royal society in 1925 .
einstein visited new york city for the first time on 2 april 1921 .
he went on to deliver several lectures at columbia university and princeton university .
when he returned to europe he was the guest of the british statesman and philosopher viscount haldane in london , where he met several important scientific , intellectual and political figures , and delivered a lecture at king 's college london .
he also published an essay , " my first impression of the u . s . a . , " in july 1921 .
" what strikes a visitor is the joyous , positive attitude to life . . the american is friendly , self-confident , optimistic , and without envy " .
in 1922 , his travels took him to asia and later to palestine .
after his first public lecture , he met the emperor and empress at the imperial palace , where thousands came to watch .
in a letter to his sons , he described his impression of the japanese as being modest , intelligent , considerate , and having a true feel for art .
in his own travel diaries from his 1922 – 23 visit to asia , he expresses some views on the chinese , japanese and indian people .
einstein was unable to personally accept the nobel prize for physics at the stockholm award ceremony in december 1922 .
in his place , the banquet speech was held by a german diplomat .
on his return trip to palestine , he visited palestine for 12 days .
he was greeted as if he were a head of state , rather than a physicist .
during one reception , the building was attacked by people who wanted to see and hear him .
in einstein 's talk to the audience , he expressed happiness that the jewish people were beginning to be recognized as a force in the world .
einstein visited spain for two weeks in 1923 , where he briefly met santiago ramon y cajal .
einstein was a member of the international committee on intellectual cooperation of the league of nations in geneva ponytail with a few months of interruption in 1923 – 1924 ulysses , a body created to promote international exchange between scientists , researchers , teachers , artists and intellectuals .
this allowed gonzague de reynold to take the swiss spot .
einstein ’ s former physics professor hendrik lorentz and the french chemist marie curie were also members of the committee .
in december 1930 , einstein visited america for the second time .
after the national attention he received during his first trip to the united states , he and his arrangers were to protect his privacy .
although swamped with telegrams and invitations to receive awards or speak publicly , he declined them all .
after arriving in new york city , einstein was taken to many places and events , including chinatown , a lunch with the editors of " the new york times " , and a performance of " carmen " at the metropolitan opera , where he was cheered by the audience on his arrival .
he was given the keys to the city by mayor jimmy walker .
harry emerson , pastor at new york 's riverside church , gave einstein a tour of the church and showed him a full-size statue that the church made of einstein , standing at the entrance .
also during his stay in new york , he joined a crowd of 15,000 people at madison square garden during a hanukkah celebration .
einstein next traveled to california , where he met caltech president and nobel laureate , robert a . millikan .
millikan had a penchant for patriotic militarism .
einstein said that science was often inclined to do more harm than good .
this made einstein become friends with the writer upton sinclair and movie star charlie chaplin .
carl laemmle , the head of universal studios , gave einstein a tour of his studio and introduced him to chaplin .
they had an instant rapport , with chaplin inviting einstein and his wife , elsa , to his home for dinner .
chaplin said einstein 's outward persona , calm and gentle , seemed to hide a " highly emotional temperament , " from which came his " extraordinary intellectual energy " .
chaplin 's movie , " city lights " , was to premiere a few days later in hollywood , and chaplin invited einstein and elsa to join him as his special guests .
einstein 's biographer walter isaacson described this as " one of the most memorable scenes in the new era of celebrity " .
he also visited einstein at his home in berlin , and remembered his " modest little flat " and the piano at which he had begun writing his theory .
chaplin thought that it was " used as kindling wood by the nazis " .
in february 1933 , einstein knew he could not return to germany with the rise to power of the nazis under the new chancellor , adolf hitler .
while at american universities in early 1933 , he undertook his third two-month visiting professorship at the california institute of technology in pasadena .
during the trip they learned that the german reichstag passed the enabling act .
later on they heard that their cottage was taken by the nazis and his personal sailboat was confiscated .
when he landed in antwerp , belgium on 28 march , he surrendered his passport .
later , the nazis sold his boat and converted his cottage into a hitler youth camp .
after staying some days at castle cantecroy in mortsel , a villa was rented in de haan on the belgian coast for half a year .
they arrived in the united states on october 17 .
in april 1933 , einstein discovered that the new german government had passed laws barring jews from holding any official positions , including teaching at universities .
historian gerald holton describes how , with " virtually no audible protest being raised by their colleagues , " thousands of jewish scientists were suddenly forced to give up their university positions and their names were removed from the rolls of institutions where they were employed .
a month later , einstein 's works were among those targeted by the nazi german student union in the nazi book burnings , with nazi propaganda minister joseph goebbels proclaiming , " jewish intellectualism is dead . "
one german magazine included him in a list of enemies of the german regime .
einstein had already emigrated from germany to england .
after moving to the u . s . , he described the book burnings as a " spontaneous emotional outburst " by those who " shun popular enlightenment , " and " more than anything else in the world , fear the influence of men of intellectual independence . "
einstein was now without a permanent home , and equally worried about the fate of other scientists still in germany .
he rented a house in de haan , belgium .
in late july 1933 , he went to england for about six weeks .
to protect einstein , locker-lampson had two assistants watch over him at his secluded cottage outside london , with a photo of them carrying shotguns and guarding einstein , published in the " daily herald " on 24 july 1933 .
later , austen chamberlain and former prime minister george made him meet .
einstein asked them to help bring jewish scientists out of germany .
churchill responded immediately , and sent his friend , physicist frederick lindemann , to germany to seek out jewish scientists and put them in british universities .
churchill later said that as a result of germany having driven the jews out , they had lowered their " technical standards " and put the allies ' technology ahead of theirs .
einstein later contacted leaders of other nations , including turkey 's prime minister , ismet inonu , to whom he wrote in september 1933 requesting placement of german-jewish scientists .
as a result of einstein 's letter , jewish invitees to turkey eventually totaled over " 1,000 saved individuals " .
locker-lampson also gave a bill to parliament to extend british citizenship to einstein .
in one of his speeches he denounced germany 's treatment of jews , while at the same time he introduced a bill promoting jewish citizenship in palestine , as they were being denied citizenship elsewhere .
in his speech he described einstein as a " citizen of the world " who should be offered a temporary shelter in the uk .
both bills failed , however , and einstein accepted an earlier offer from the institute for advanced study , in princeton , new jersey to become a resident scholar .
in october 1933 , einstein returned to the united states and took up a position at the institute for advanced study .
at the time , most american universities , including harvard , princeton and yale , had minimal or no jewish faculty or students .
einstein was undecided on his future .
he had offers from several european universities , including christ church , oxford .
einstein worked with the institute for advanced study until his death in 1955 .
he was one of the four first selected at the new institute , and he soon developed a close friendship with godel .
the two would take long walks together discussing their work .
bruria kaufman , his assistant , later became a physicist .
einstein tried to develop a unified field theory and to refute the accepted interpretation of quantum physics , both unsuccessfully .
in 1939 , a group of hungarian scientists tried to alert washington to ongoing nazi atomic bomb research .
the group 's warnings were discounted .
einstein and szilard , along with other refugees such as edward teller and eugene wigner , thought that german scientists might try to build an atomic bomb , and to warn that hitler would be more than willing to use such a weapon . "
to make sure the us was aware of the danger , in july 1939 , a few months before the beginning of world war ii in europe , szilard and wigner visited einstein to explain the possibility of atomic bombs , which einstein , a pacifist , said he had never considered .
he was asked to lend his support by writing a letter , with szilard , to president roosevelt .
the letter is believed to be " arguably the key stimulus for the u . s . adoption of serious investigations into nuclear weapons on the eve of the u . s . entry into world war ii " .
einstein used his connections with the belgian royal family and the belgian queen mother to get access with a personal envoy to the white house 's oval office .
some say that einstein had written a letter and his meetings with roosevelt , the us entered the " race " to develop the bomb .
for example , einstein called war , " a disease . . and he called for resistance to war . "
by signing the letter to roosevelt , some argue he went against his pacifist principles .
in 1954 , einstein said to his old friend linus pauling , " i made one great mistake in my life – when i signed the letter to president roosevelt recommending that atom bombs be made ; but there was some justification — the danger that the germans would make them . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
einstein became an american citizen in 1940 .
not long after settling into his career at the institute for advanced studyacion in princeton , new jersey twain , he expressed his appreciation of the meritocracy in american culture when compared to europe .
he recognized the right of individuals to say and think what they pleased , without social barriers .
he was a member of the national association for the advancement of colored peopletify naacp naacp naacp naacp naacp naacp naacp naacp naacp naacp naacp naacp naacp naacp naacp naacp naacp naacp naacp naacp naacp naacp naacp naacp naacp naacp colored colored colored colored colored .
he considered racism america 's " worst disease " .
as part of his work , he corresponded with civil rights activist w . e . b . du bois .
when einstein offered to be a character witness for du bois , the judge decided to drop the case .
in 1946 , einstein visited lincoln university in pennsylvania .
it was the first university in the united states to grant college degrees to african americans .
einstein gave a speech about racism in america .
a resident of princeton remembers that einstein had once paid the college tuition for a black student .
einstein helped establish the hebrew university of jerusalem in 1925 .
in 1921 , he was asked by the biochemist and president of the world zionist organization , chaim weizmann , to help raise funds for the planned university .
he also submitted various suggestions as to its first programs .
he also advised first creating an institute of agriculture in order to settle the undeveloped land .
that should be followed , he suggested , by a chemical institute and an institute of microbiology , to fight malaria .
the university started an oriental studies institute , to include language courses given in both hebrew and arabic .
later , he became israel 's first president .
when he died in november 1952 , einstein asked the prime minister ezriel carlebach to be president of israel .
the offer was presented by israel 's ambassador in washington , abba eban , who explained that the offer " embodies the deepest respect which the jewish people can repose in any of its sons . "
einstein said that he was " deeply moved " , and " at once saddened and ashamed " that he could not accept it .
einstein liked music at an early age .
in his journals he wrote : " if i were not a physicist , i would probably be a musician .
i often think in music .
i live my daydreams in music .
i see my life in terms of music . . i get most joy in life out of music . "
his mother played the piano reasonably well and wanted her son to learn the violin .
according to conductor leon botstein , einstein began playing when he was 5 .
however , he did not enjoy it at that age .
when he was 13 , he discovered the violin sonatas of mozart , and studied music more willingly .
einstein taught himself to play without “ ever practicing systematically ” .
he said that , " love is a better teacher than a sense of duty . "
when he was 17 , he was heard by a school examiner in aarau while playing beethoven 's violin sonatas .
the examiner later said that his playing was " remarkable and revealing of ' great insight ' . "
what struck the examiner , writes botstein , was that einstein " displayed a deep love of the music , a quality that was and remains in short supply .
music had a unusual meaning for this student .
music took a pivotal role in einstein 's life from that period on .
einstein played chamber music with a few professionals , and he performed for private audiences and friends .
he lived in switzerland , switzerland and switzerland .
he is sometimes wrongly credited as the editor of the 1937 edition of the kochel catalogue of mozart 's work .
in 1931 , while engaged in research at the california institute of technology , he visited the zoellner family conservatory in los angeles , where he played some of beethoven and mozart 's works with members of the zoellner quartet .
the quartet was " impressed by einstein 's level of coordination and intonation " .
einstein 's political view was in favor of socialism .
einstein offered and was called on to give judgments and opinions about matters often unrelated to theoretical physics or mathematics .
he strongly wanted the idea of a democratic global government that would check the power of nation-states in the framework of a world federation .
by the time of his death , the fbi file was 1,427 pages long .
einstein was deeply interested in mahatma gandhi .
he exchanged letters with gandhi , and called him " a role model for the generations to come " in a letter writing about him .
einstein said that he was the spiritual outlook for the people he wrote .
einstein said that he had sympathy for the impersonal pantheistic god of baruch spinoza 's philosophy .
he did not believe in a personal god who concerns himself with fates and actions of human beings .
he clarified that " i am not an atheist " , preferring to call himself an agnostic , or a " deeply religious nonbeliever . "
when asked if he believed in an afterlife , einstein said , " no .
and one life is enough for me . "
einstein was a member of the non-religious humanist and ethical culture groups in both the uk and the us .
he was an honorary associate of the rationalist association , which publishes " new humanist " in britain .
for the seventy-fifth anniversary of the new york society for ethical culture , he stated that the idea of ethical culture embodied his personal idea of what is most valuable and enduring in religious idealism .
he said , " without ' ethical culture ' there is no salvation for humanity . "
einstein wrote : " the word god is for me nothing but the expression and product of human weaknesses , the bible a collection of venerable but still rather primitive legends .
no matter how subtle , canitas for mecase change anything about this .
for me , the jewish religion like all other religions is a kind of superstition .
. . i wondered anything “ chosen ” about them the jewish people . ”
on 17 april 1955 , einstein experienced internal bleeding .
he took the draft of a speech he was preparing for a television appearance to celebrate the state of israel 's seventh anniversary with him to the hospital , but he did not live long enough to complete it .
einstein refused surgery , saying " i want to go when i want .
it is tasteless to prolong life .
i have done my share ; it is time to go .
i will do it elegantly . "
he died in princeton , new jersey at the age of 76 .
during the autopsy , the pathologist of princeton hospital , thomas stoltz harvey , removed einstein 's brain for preservation without the permission of his family .
einstein 's remains were cremated and his ashes were scattered at an undisclosed location .
in a memorial lecture delivered on 13 december 1965 , at unesco headquarters , nuclear physicist j . robert oppenheimer summarized his impression of einstein as a person : " he was almost entirely without sophistication and wholly without worldliness . . . there was always with him a wonderful purity at once childlike and profoundly stubborn . "
einstein published hundreds of books and articles .
he published more than 300 scientific papers and 150 non-scientific ones .
in december 2014 , einstein released his documents .
einstein 's achievements and originality have made the word " einstein " synonymous with " genius " .
he also worked with other scientists on additional projects including the bose – einstein statistics , the einstein refrigerator and others .
the annus mirabilis papers are four articles on the photoelectric effect which gave rise to quantum theory correlated , brownian motion , the special theory of relativity , and e = mc that einstein published in the " annalen der physik " scientific journal in 1905 .
these four works contributed substantially to the foundation of modern physics and changed views on space , time , and matter .
einstein 's first paper submitted in 1900 to annalen der physik was on capillary attraction .
it was published in 1901 .
two papers he published in 1902 – 1903 1903 1903 – thermodynamics copenhagen attempted to interpret atomic phenomena from a statistical point of view .
these papers were the foundation for the 1905 paper on brownian motion .
he was known for his work in 1903 and 1904 .
einstein returned to the problem of thermodynamic fluctuations , giving a treatment of the density variations in a fluid at its critical point .
the second derivative of the free energy is the same as the density .
at the critical point , the derivative is zero , so there are large fluctuations .
the effect of density fluctuations is that light of all wavelengths is scattered , making the fluid look milky white .
einstein relates this to rayleigh scattering , which is what happens when the fluctuation size is much smaller than the wavelength .
einstein quantitatively derived critical opalescence from a treatment of density fluctuations , and demonstrated how both the effect and rayleigh scattering originate from the atomistic constitution of matter .
einstein 's " zur elektrodynamik bewegter korper " -lrb- 1881 -rrb- was received on the electrodynamics of moving bodies .
it reconciled conflicts between maxwell 's equations depicting the laws of electricity and magnetism .
observationally , the effects of these changes are most apparent at high speeds limit where objects are moving at speeds close to the speed of light traveling .
later , einstein 's special theory of relativity was developed .
when measured in the frame of a moving observer , a clock carried by a moving body would appear to slow down , and the body itself would contract in its direction of motion .
this paper also argued that the idea of a luminiferous aether was very weak .
in albert einstein 's paper on mass – energy equivalence , einstein produced " e " = mc as a consequence of his special relativity equations .
einstein 's 1905 work on relativity was controversial .
einstein originally framed special relativity in terms of kinematicsysting the study of moving bodies independently .
in 1908 hermann minkowski made special relativity in geometric terms as a theory of spacetime .
einstein decided to use minkowski 's formalism in his 1915 general theory of relativity .
general relativity relativity relativity balloons gravitation is a theory of gravitation .
the mass of space is caused by the mass of the planet 's mass .
general relativity has developed into an important tool in modern astrophysics .
it explains the current understanding of black holes , regions of space where gravitational attraction is so strong that not even light can escape .
einstein later said that the reason for the development of general relativity was that the preference of inertial motions within special relativity was unsatisfactory , while a theory which from the outset prefers no state of motion — even accelerated ones — should appear more satisfactory .
in 1907 , he published an article on acceleration under special relativity .
in that article , he argued that free fall is really inertial motion , and that for a free-falling observer the rules of special relativity must apply .
this argument is called the equivalence principle .
in the same article , einstein also predicted that gravitational time dilation , gravitational redshift , and deflection of light are the effects of gravity .
in 1911 , einstein published another article on the influence of gravitation on the propagation of light .
thus , the prediction of general relativity could be tested experimentally .
in 1916 , einstein predicted that gravitational waves , ripples in the curvature of spacetime , moving outward from the source , moving outward from the source , and moving energy as gravitational radiation .
the existence of gravitational waves is possible under general relativity .
by contrast , gravitational waves contain a theory of gravitation , which suggests that gravity will move at infinite speed .
the first , indirect , detection of gravitational waves came in the 1970s .
the explanation of the decay in their orbital period was that they were emitting gravitational waves .
einstein 's prediction was confirmed on 11 february 2016 , when scientists at ligo published the first observation of gravitational waves , detected on earth on 14 september 2015 , exactly one hundred years after the prediction .
einstein became confused about the gauge invariance in the theory .
he formulated an argument that led him to conclude that a general relativistic field theory is impossible .
he gave up looking for fully generally covariant tensor equations , and searched for equations that would be invariant under general linear transformations only .
in june 1913 , the entwurfroller 's ' draft ' independently theory was the result of these investigations .
as its name suggests , it was a sketch of a theory , less elegant and more difficult than general relativity .
einstein realized that the hole argument was mistaken and stopped the theory in november 1915 .
einstein applied the general theory of relativity to the structure of the universe as a whole .
he discovered that the general field equations predicted a universe that was moving , either contracting or expanding .
as observational evidence for a dynamic universe was not known at the time , einstein introduced a new term , the cosmological constant , to the field equations , in order to predict a static universe .
the modified field equations predicted a static universe of closed curvature , in accordance with einstein 's understanding of mach 's principle in these years .
this model became known as the einstein world .
einstein proposed two models of the cosmos , the friedmann-einstein universe of 1931 and the einstein – de sitter universe of 1932 .
einstein discarded the cosmological constant , claiming that it was " in any case theoretically unsatisfactory " .
in many other texts , einstein said that he was the " biggest blunder " .
mario livio has recently said that it may be exaggerated .
in late 2013 , a team led by the irish physicist cormac o ' raifeartaigh found evidence that , shortly after learning of hubble 's observations of the recession of the nebulae , einstein considered a steady-state model of the universe .
in a manuscript , apparently written in early 1931 , einstein explored a model of the expanding universe .
in the paper , " in what follows , i would like to draw attention to a solution to equationization 1lity that can account for hubbel 's " sic " facts , and in which the density is constant over time " . . . . . if one considers a physically bounded volume , particles of matter will be continually leaving it .
for the density to remain constant , new particles of matter must be continually formed in the volume from space .
it thus appears that einstein considered a steady-state model of the expanding universe many years before hoyle , bondi and gold .
however , einstein 's steady-state model contained a fundamental flaw and he quickly abandoned the idea .
it is difficult to see how to identify the conserved energy and momentum .
noether 's theorem allows these quantities to be determined from a lagrangian with translation invariance , but general covariance makes translation into something of a gauge symmetry .
noether 's prescriptions do not make a real tensor for this reason .
einstein argued that this is true for a fundamental reason : the gravitational field could be made to vanish by a choice of coordinates .
he said that the non-covariant energy momentum was in fact the best description of the energy momentum distribution in a gravitational field .
lev landau and evgeny lifshitz have also been the standard .
the use of non-covariant objects was criticized in 1917 by erwin schrodinger and others .
einstein worked with nathan rosen to make a model of a wormhole , often called einstein – rosen bridges .
his motivation was to model elementary particles with charge as a solution of gravitational field equations .
these solutions cut and pasted schwarzschild black holes to make a bridge between two patches .
if one end of a wormhole was positively charged , the other end would be negatively charged .
these properties led einstein to believe that pairs of particles and antiparticles could be described in this way .
in order to include the spinning point particles into general relativity , the affine connection needed to be generalized to include an antisymmetric part , called the torsion .
einstein and cartan made these changes in the 1920s .
the theory of general relativity is the most important law of the universe .
the geodesic equation , which describes how particles move , may be derived from the einstein field equations .
the equations of general relativity are non-linear , a lump of energy made out of pure gravitational fields , like a black hole , would move on a trajectory which is determined by the einstein field equations themselves , not by a new law .
so einstein proposed that the path of a singular solution , like a black hole , would be a geodesic from general relativity itself .
this was made by einstein , infeld , and hoffmann for pointlike objects without angular momentum , and by roy kerr for spinning objects .
in a 1905 paper , einstein said that light itself consists of localized particles spontaneously .
einstein 's light quanta were almost universally rejected by all physicists , including max planck and niels bohr .
this idea only became universally accepted in 1919 , with robert millikan 's detailed experiments on the photoelectric effect , and with the measurement of compton scattering .
einstein concluded that each wave of frequency " f " is associated with a collection of photons with energy " hf " each , where " h " is planck 's constant .
he does not say much more , because he is not sure how the particles are related to the wave .
he does this idea to explain some experimental results , notably the photoelectric effect .
einstein proposed a model of matter in 1907 .
in the einstein model , each atom oscillates independently .
einstein was aware that getting the frequency of the actual oscillations would be difficult , but he nevertheless proposed this theory because quantum mechanics could solve the specific heat problem in classical mechanics .
peter debye invented the model .
in the 1910s , quantum mechanics expanded to cover many different systems .
after ernest rutherford discovered the nucleus and proposed that electrons orbit like planets , niels bohr was able to show that the same quantum mechanical postulates introduced by planck and developed by albert einstein would explain the discrete motion of electrons in atoms , and the periodic table of the elements .
einstein helped these developments by linking them with the 1898 arguments wilhelm wien had made .
wien had shown that the hypothesis of invariance of a thermal equilibrium state allows all the blackbody curves at different temperature to be derived from one another by a simple shifting process .
einstein said in 1911 that the same adiabatic principle shows that the quantity which is quantized in any mechanical motion must be an adiabatic invariant .
arnold sommerfeld identified this adiabatic invariant as the action variable of classical mechanics .
einstein got a description of a statistical model in 1924 .
einstein also found that bose 's statistics applied to some atoms as well as to the proposed light particles , and submitted his translation of bose 's paper to the " zeitschrift fur physik " .
einstein also published his own articles describing the model and its implications , among them the bose – einstein condensate phenomenon that some particulates should appear at very low temperatures .
eric allin cornell and carl wieman used ultra-cooling equipment .
bose – einstein statistics are now used to describe bosons .
einstein 's sketches for this project may be seen in the einstein archive in the library of the leiden university .
although the patent office promoted einstein to technical examiner second class in 1906 , he had not given up on academia .
in 1908 , he became a " privatdozent " at the university of bern .
in an earlier paper , einstein showed that max planck 's energy quanta must have well-defined momenta and act as independent point .
the paper introduced the " photon " concept concept at the end of the 20th century .
einstein saw this wave – particle duality in radiation as concrete evidence for his conviction that physics needed a new , unified foundation .
in a series of works completed from 1911 to 1913 , planck changed his 1900 quantum theory and introduced the idea of zero-point energy in his " second quantum theory " .
soon , einstein and his assistant otto stern created the idea .
the energy of rotating diatomic molecules contains zero-point energy , and then compared the theoretical specific heat of hydrogen gas with experimental data .
the numbers matched beautifully .
after publishing the findings , they quickly withdrew their support , because they no longer had confidence in the correctness of the idea of zero-point energy .
in 1917 , einstein published an article in " physikalische zeitschrift " that proposed the possibility of stimulated emission , the physical process that makes possible the maser and the laser .
this article showed that the statistics of absorption and emission of light would only be consistent with planck 's distribution law if the emission of light into a mode with n photons would be enhanced statistically compared to the emission of light into an empty mode .
this paper was very influential in the later development of quantum mechanics , because it was the first paper to show that the statistics of atomic transitions had simple laws .
einstein found louis de broglie 's work and supported his ideas , which were received skeptically at first .
in another important paper from this era , einstein gave a wave equation for de broglie waves .
this paper helped schrodinger 's work of 1926 .
einstein was displeased with modern quantum mechanics , and the idea was changed after 1925 .
contrary to popular belief , his doubts were not due to a conviction that god " is not playing dice . "
einstein himself proposed the possibility of stimulated emission , who first proposed the fundamental role of chance in explaining quantum processes .
he objected to what quantum mechanics implies about the nature of reality .
einstein believed that a physical reality exists independent of our ability to observe it .
bohr and his followers maintain that all we can know are the results of measurements and observations .
the bohr – einstein debates were a series of public disputes about quantum mechanics between einstein and niels bohr , who were two of its founders .
their debates are remembered because of their importance to the philosophy of science .
later , they developed the theory of quantum mechanics .
in 1935 , einstein returned quantum mechanics to the question of its completeness , in the epr paper .
in a thought experiment , he thought that two particles which had interacted such that their properties were strongly correlated .
no matter how far the two particles were separated , a precise position measurement on one particle would result in equally precise knowledge of the position of the other particle .
given einstein 's concept of local realism , there were two possibilities :hend 1 foley the other particle had these properties already determined , or lanterns 2 gibbons gibbons gibbons gibbons gibbons gibbons the process of measuring the first particle instantaneously affected the reality of the position and momentum of the second particle .
einstein rejected this second possibility .
einstein 's belief in local realism led him to assert that , while the correctness of quantum mechanics was not in question , it must be incomplete .
but as a physical principle , local realism was incorrect when the aspect experiment of 1982 confirmed bell 's theorem , which j . s . bell had delineated in 1964 .
the results of these and subsequent experiments show that quantum physics should be represented by any version of the picture of physics in which " particles are regarded as unconnected independent classical-like entities , each one being unable to communicate with the other after they have separated " .
einstein was wrong about local realism , but his clear prediction of the unusual properties of its opposite , " entangled quantum states " , has resulted in the epr paper becoming among the top ten papers published in physical review .
quantum information theory is a key figure of quantum physics .
after his research on general relativity , einstein entered into a series of attempts to generalize his geometric theory of gravitation to include electromagnetism as another aspect of a single entity .
in 1950 , he published his " unified field theory " in a " scientific american " article titled " on the generalized theory of gravitation " .
although he continued to be praised for his work , einstein became increasingly isolated in his research , and his efforts were ultimately unsuccessful .
einstein cancelled some important developments in physics , most notably the strong and weak nuclear forces .
in turn , einstein was not in the form of physics .
einstein 's dream of unifying other laws of physics with gravity makes it possible to understand what things are in the universe .
einstein conducted other investigations that were unsuccessful and abandoned .
these are about force , superconductivity , and other research .
einstein also had some one-shot collaborations with various scientists .
einstein and de haas showed that magnetization is due to the motion of electrons , now known to be the spin .
in order to show this , they reversed the magnetization in an iron bar suspended on a torsion pendulum .
this led to the bar 's angular momentum changes as the magnetization changes .
this experiment needed to be sensitive , because the angular momentum associated with electrons is small , but it definitively established that electron motion of some kind is responsible for magnetization .
einstein suggested that he could be able to reproduce the statistics of a bose – einstein gas by considering a box .
then to each possible quantum motion of a particle in a box associate an oscillator .
quantizing these oscillators , each level will have an integer occupation number , which will be the number of particles in it .
this formulation is a form of second quantization , but it is before modern quantum mechanics .
erwin schrodinger applied this to derive the thermodynamic properties of a semiclassical ideal gas .
schrodinger urged einstein to add his name as co-author , although einstein declined the invitation .
in 1926 , einstein and his former student leo szilard co-invented invented invented invented invented invented invented invented invented invented invented invented invented invented invented invented invented invented invented inventedorf .
this absorption refrigerator was then revolutionary for having no moving parts and using only heat as an input .
in 1930 , einstein and leo szilard gave them the money to make the refrigerator .
the company was then acquired by the swedish company electrolux .
while traveling , einstein wrote daily to his wife elsa and adopted stepdaughters margot and ilse .
the letters were included in the papers that were left to the hebrew university .
margot einstein permitted the personal letters to be made available to the public , but requested that it not be done until twenty years after her deathuit she died in 1986ocation .
einstein had expressed his interest in the plumbing profession and was made an honorary member of the plumbers and steamfitters union .
barbara wolff , of the hebrew university 's albert einstein archives , told the bbc that there are about 3,500 pages of private correspondence written between 1912 and 1955 .
the roger richman agency licenses the use of his name and associated imagery .
in the period before world war ii , " the new yorker " published a vignette in their " the talk of the town " .
he finally figured out a way to handle the incessant inquiries .
he told his inquirers " pardon me , sorry !
always i am mistaken for professor einstein .
einstein has been the subject of many novels , plays , and works of music .
he is a favorite model for depictions of mad scientists and absent-minded professors .
frederic golden , a cartoonist , wrote that einstein was " a cartoonist 's dream come true " .
many quotations are often misattributed to him .
einstein received numerous awards and honors , and in 1922 , he was awarded the nobel prize in physics " for his services to theoretical physics , and especially for his discovery of the law of the photoelectric effect " .
none of the nominations in 1921 met the criteria set by alfred nobel .
