he is best known to the general public for his mass-energy equivalence formula _ 1 , which has been dubbed " the world 's most famous equation " .
he received the nobel prize in physics in 1921 for his work in theoretical physics .
near the beginning of his career , einstein thought that newtonian mechanics was no longer enough to make the laws of classical mechanics with the laws of the electromagnetic field .
this led him to develop his special theory of relativity during his time at the swiss patent office in bern dq 1902-1909amen .
however , he realized that the principle of relativity could also be extended to gravitational fields , and he published a paper on general relativity in 1916 with his theory of gravitation .
he continued to deal with problems of statistical mechanics and quantum theory .
in 1917 , he applied the general theory of relativity to explain how the universe was .
einstein lived in switzerland between 1895 and 1914 .
after being stateless for more than five years , he became swiss citizen in 1901 , which he kept for the rest of his life .
he became an american citizen in 1940 .
on the eve of world war ii , he endorsed a letter to president franklin d . roosevelt .
he supported the allies , but he generally said that nuclear fission was a weapon .
he was a member of the institute for advanced study in princeton , new jersey until his death in 1955 .
he published more than 300 scientific papers and more than 150 non-scientific works .
at the age of eight , he was transferred to the luitpold gymnasium gymnasium greenwich now known as the albert einstein gymnasium [mask] .
his father wanted him to be an electrical engineer , but einstein disagreed with authorities and resented the school 's regimen and teaching method .
he later wrote that the spirit of learning and creative thought was lost in strict rote learning .
during his time in italy , he wrote a short essay with the title " on the investigation of the state of the ether in a magnetic field " .
einstein was always good at math and physics from a young age , reaching a mathematical level years ahead of his peers .
einstein also independently discovered the pythagorean theorem at the age of 12 .
max talmud says that after he had given the 12-year-old einstein a geometry textbook , after a short time " einstein had worked through the whole book .
his passion for geometry and algebra led the twelve-year-old to become convinced that nature could be understood as a " mathematical structure " .
einstein started teaching himself at 12 years old .
at the age of 13 , einstein was introduced to kant 's " critique of pure reason " , and kant became his favourite philosopher , his tutor stating : " at the time he was still a child , only thirteen years old , yet kant 's works , incomprehensible to ordinary mortals , seemed to be clear to him . "
he did not get enough to do the required standard in the general part of the examination , but got very good grades in physics and mathematics .
einstein 's future wife , mileva maric , was also in the polytechnic that year .
over the next few years , einstein 's and maric 's friendship developed into romance .
in 1900 , einstein passed the exams in maths and physics and was awarded the federal polytechnic teaching diploma .
an early correspondence between einstein and maric was discovered and published in 1987 .
maric returned to switzerland without the child .
in letters revealed in 2015 , einstein wrote to his early love marie winteler about his marriage and his strong feelings for her .
he wrote in 1910 , while his wife was pregnant with their second child : " i think of you in heartfelt love every spare minute and am so unhappy as only a man can be . "
they moved to the united states in 1933 .
she was diagnosed with heart and kidney problems .
among einstein 's well-known friends were michele besso , paul ehrenfest , marcel grossmann , janos plesch , daniel q . posin , maurice solovine , and stephen wise .
he became swiss citizen in february 1901 .
with the help of marcel grossmann 's father , he got a job in bern at the federal office for intellectual property , the patent office , as an assistant examiner-level iii .
their readings included henri poincare , ernst mach , and david hume .
einstein completed his thesis on 30 april 1905 .
einstein was awarded a phd by the university of zurich , with his dissertation " a new determination of molecular dimensions " .
in that same year , which has been called einstein 's " annus mirabilis " independently published four groundbreaking papers , on the photoelectric effect , brownian motion , special relativity , and the equivalence of mass and energy , which were to bring him to the notice of the academic world , at the age of 26 .
by 1908 , he was recognized as a leading scientist and was appointed lecturer at the university of bern .
einstein became a full professor at the german charles-ferdinand university in prague in april 1911 .
during his prague stay , he wrote 11 scientific works , five of them on radiation mathematics and on the quantum theory of solids .
he also studied the mathematical continuum mechanics , the molecular theory of heat , and the problem of gravitation .
on 3 july 1913 , he was voted for membership in the prussian academy of sciences in berlin .
max planck and walther nernst visited him the next week in zurich to persuade him to join the academy .
his decision to move to berlin was also influenced by the possibility of living near his cousin elsa , with whom he had developed a romantic affair .
he joined the academy and the berlin university on 1 april 1914 .
the kaiser wilhelm institute for physics was unable to use the idea .
einstein was elected president of the german physical society in 1916 .
einstein made in 1911 , about his theory of gravity , light from another star should be bent by the sun 's gravity .
in 1919 , that prediction was confirmed by sir arthur eddington during the solar eclipse of 29 may 1919 .
those observations were published in the international media , making einstein world-famous .
on 7 november 1919 , the leading british newspaper " the times " printed a banner headline that read : " revolution in science – new theory of the universe – newtonian ideas overthrown " .
in 1920 , he became a foreign member of the royal netherlands academy of arts and sciences .
einstein was elected a foreign member of the royal society jemison formemrs parapet in 1921 .
he also received the copley medal from the royal society in 1925 .
einstein visited new york city for the first time on 2 april 1921 .
he went on to deliver several lectures at columbia university and princeton university .
when he returned to europe he was the guest of the british statesman and philosopher viscount haldane in london , where he met several important scientific , intellectual and political figures , and delivered a lecture at king 's college london .
what strikes a visitor is the joyous , positive attitude to life . . the american is friendly , self-confident , optimistic , and without envy " .
in a letter to his sons , he described his impression of the japanese as being modest , intelligent , considerate , and having a true feel for art .
in his own travel diaries from his 1922 – 23 visit to asia , he expresses some views on the chinese , japanese and indian people .
einstein was unable to personally accept the nobel prize for physics at the stockholm award ceremony in december 1922 .
in his place , the banquet speech was held by a german diplomat .
on his return trip to palestine , he visited palestine for 12 days .
during one reception , the building was attacked by people who wanted to see and hear him .
in einstein 's talk to the audience , he expressed happiness that the jewish people were beginning to be recognized as a force in the world .
einstein visited spain for two weeks in 1923 , where he briefly met santiago ramon y cajal .
einstein was a member of the international committee on intellectual cooperation of the league of nations in geneva ponytail with a few months of interruption in 1923 – 1924 ulysses , a body created to promote international exchange between scientists , researchers , teachers , artists and intellectuals .
after the national attention he received during his first trip to the united states , he and his arrangers were to protect his privacy .
although swamped with telegrams and invitations to receive awards or speak publicly , he declined them all .
after arriving in new york city , einstein was taken to many places and events , including chinatown , a lunch with the editors of " the new york times " , and a performance of " carmen " at the metropolitan opera , where he was cheered by the audience on his arrival .
harry emerson , pastor at new york 's riverside church , gave einstein a tour of the church and showed him a full-size statue that the church made of einstein , standing at the entrance .
also during his stay in new york , he joined a crowd of 15,000 people at madison square garden during a hanukkah celebration .
einstein next traveled to california , where he met caltech president and nobel laureate , robert a . millikan .
einstein said that science was often inclined to do more harm than good .
this made einstein become friends with the writer upton sinclair and movie star charlie chaplin .
carl laemmle , the head of universal studios , gave einstein a tour of his studio and introduced him to chaplin .
chaplin said einstein 's outward persona , calm and gentle , seemed to hide a " highly emotional temperament , " from which came his " extraordinary intellectual energy " .
chaplin 's movie , " city lights " , was to premiere a few days later in hollywood , and chaplin invited einstein and elsa to join him as his special guests .
einstein 's biographer walter isaacson described this as " one of the most memorable scenes in the new era of celebrity " .
he also visited einstein at his home in berlin , and remembered his " modest little flat " and the piano at which he had begun writing his theory .
in february 1933 , einstein knew he could not return to germany with the rise to power of the nazis under the new chancellor , adolf hitler .
while at american universities in early 1933 , he undertook his third two-month visiting professorship at the california institute of technology in pasadena .
later on they heard that their cottage was taken by the nazis and his personal sailboat was confiscated .
when he landed in antwerp , belgium on 28 march , he surrendered his passport .
later , the nazis sold his boat and converted his cottage into a hitler youth camp .
after staying some days at castle cantecroy in mortsel , a villa was rented in de haan on the belgian coast for half a year .
they arrived in the united states on october 17 .
in april 1933 , einstein discovered that the new german government had passed laws barring jews from holding any official positions , including teaching at universities .
historian gerald holton describes how , with " virtually no audible protest being raised by their colleagues , " thousands of jewish scientists were suddenly forced to give up their university positions and their names were removed from the rolls of institutions where they were employed .
a month later , einstein 's works were among those targeted by the nazi german student union in the nazi book burnings , with nazi propaganda minister joseph goebbels proclaiming , " jewish intellectualism is dead . "
after moving to the u . s . , he described the book burnings as a " spontaneous emotional outburst " by those who " shun popular enlightenment , " and " more than anything else in the world , fear the influence of men of intellectual independence . "
einstein was now without a permanent home , and equally worried about the fate of other scientists still in germany .
to protect einstein , locker-lampson had two assistants watch over him at his secluded cottage outside london , with a photo of them carrying shotguns and guarding einstein , published in the " daily herald " on 24 july 1933 .
later , austen chamberlain and former prime minister george made him meet .
einstein asked them to help bring jewish scientists out of germany .
churchill responded immediately , and sent his friend , physicist frederick lindemann , to germany to seek out jewish scientists and put them in british universities .
churchill later said that as a result of germany having driven the jews out , they had lowered their " technical standards " and put the allies ' technology ahead of theirs .
einstein later contacted leaders of other nations , including turkey 's prime minister , ismet inonu , to whom he wrote in september 1933 requesting placement of german-jewish scientists .
in one of his speeches he denounced germany 's treatment of jews , while at the same time he introduced a bill promoting jewish citizenship in palestine , as they were being denied citizenship elsewhere .
in his speech he described einstein as a " citizen of the world " who should be offered a temporary shelter in the uk .
both bills failed , however , and einstein accepted an earlier offer from the institute for advanced study , in princeton , new jersey to become a resident scholar .
at the time , most american universities , including harvard , princeton and yale , had minimal or no jewish faculty or students .
einstein worked with the institute for advanced study until his death in 1955 .
he was one of the four first selected at the new institute , and he soon developed a close friendship with godel .
einstein and szilard , along with other refugees such as edward teller and eugene wigner , thought that german scientists might try to build an atomic bomb , and to warn that hitler would be more than willing to use such a weapon . "
to make sure the us was aware of the danger , in july 1939 , a few months before the beginning of world war ii in europe , szilard and wigner visited einstein to explain the possibility of atomic bombs , which einstein , a pacifist , said he had never considered .
the letter is believed to be " arguably the key stimulus for the u . s . adoption of serious investigations into nuclear weapons on the eve of the u . s . entry into world war ii " .
einstein used his connections with the belgian royal family and the belgian queen mother to get access with a personal envoy to the white house 's oval office .
some say that einstein had written a letter and his meetings with roosevelt , the us entered the " race " to develop the bomb .
by signing the letter to roosevelt , some argue he went against his pacifist principles .
in 1954 , einstein said to his old friend linus pauling , " i made one great mistake in my life – when i signed the letter to president roosevelt recommending that atom bombs be made ; but there was some justification — the danger that the germans would make them .
he recognized the right of individuals to say and think what they pleased , without social barriers .
when einstein offered to be a character witness for du bois , the judge decided to drop the case .
it was the first university in the united states to grant college degrees to african americans .
a resident of princeton remembers that einstein had once paid the college tuition for a black student .
einstein helped establish the hebrew university of jerusalem in 1925 .
in 1921 , he was asked by the biochemist and president of the world zionist organization , chaim weizmann , to help raise funds for the planned university .
he also advised first creating an institute of agriculture in order to settle the undeveloped land .
the university started an oriental studies institute , to include language courses given in both hebrew and arabic .
the offer was presented by israel 's ambassador in washington , abba eban , who explained that the offer " embodies the deepest respect which the jewish people can repose in any of its sons . "
his mother played the piano reasonably well and wanted her son to learn the violin .
according to conductor leon botstein , einstein began playing when he was 5 .
however , he did not enjoy it at that age .
when he was 13 , he discovered the violin sonatas of mozart , and studied music more willingly .
when he was 17 , he was heard by a school examiner in aarau while playing beethoven 's violin sonatas .
the examiner later said that his playing was " remarkable and revealing of ' great insight ' . "
what struck the examiner , writes botstein , was that einstein " displayed a deep love of the music , a quality that was and remains in short supply .
music took a pivotal role in einstein 's life from that period on .
einstein played chamber music with a few professionals , and he performed for private audiences and friends .
in 1931 , while engaged in research at the california institute of technology , he visited the zoellner family conservatory in los angeles , where he played some of beethoven and mozart 's works with members of the zoellner quartet .
the quartet was " impressed by einstein 's level of coordination and intonation " .
einstein offered and was called on to give judgments and opinions about matters often unrelated to theoretical physics or mathematics .
he strongly wanted the idea of a democratic global government that would check the power of nation-states in the framework of a world federation .
he exchanged letters with gandhi , and called him " a role model for the generations to come " in a letter writing about him .
he did not believe in a personal god who concerns himself with fates and actions of human beings .
he clarified that " i am not an atheist " , preferring to call himself an agnostic , or a " deeply religious nonbeliever . "
einstein was a member of the non-religious humanist and ethical culture groups in both the uk and the us .
for the seventy-fifth anniversary of the new york society for ethical culture , he stated that the idea of ethical culture embodied his personal idea of what is most valuable and enduring in religious idealism .
einstein wrote : " the word god is for me nothing but the expression and product of human weaknesses , the bible a collection of venerable but still rather primitive legends .
for me , the jewish religion like all other religions is a kind of superstition .
he took the draft of a speech he was preparing for a television appearance to celebrate the state of israel 's seventh anniversary with him to the hospital , but he did not live long enough to complete it .
he died in princeton , new jersey at the age of 76 .
during the autopsy , the pathologist of princeton hospital , thomas stoltz harvey , removed einstein 's brain for preservation without the permission of his family .
in a memorial lecture delivered on 13 december 1965 , at unesco headquarters , nuclear physicist j . robert oppenheimer summarized his impression of einstein as a person : " he was almost entirely without sophistication and wholly without worldliness .
he also worked with other scientists on additional projects including the bose – einstein statistics , the einstein refrigerator and others .
the annus mirabilis papers are four articles on the photoelectric effect which gave rise to quantum theory correlated , brownian motion , the special theory of relativity , and e = mc that einstein published in the " annalen der physik " scientific journal in 1905 .
these four works contributed substantially to the foundation of modern physics and changed views on space , time , and matter .
he was known for his work in 1903 and 1904 .
einstein returned to the problem of thermodynamic fluctuations , giving a treatment of the density variations in a fluid at its critical point .
at the critical point , the derivative is zero , so there are large fluctuations .
einstein quantitatively derived critical opalescence from a treatment of density fluctuations , and demonstrated how both the effect and rayleigh scattering originate from the atomistic constitution of matter .
when measured in the frame of a moving observer , a clock carried by a moving body would appear to slow down , and the body itself would contract in its direction of motion .
in albert einstein 's paper on mass – energy equivalence , einstein produced " e " = mc as a consequence of his special relativity equations .
in 1908 hermann minkowski made special relativity in geometric terms as a theory of spacetime .
einstein decided to use minkowski 's formalism in his 1915 general theory of relativity .
it explains the current understanding of black holes , regions of space where gravitational attraction is so strong that not even light can escape .
einstein later said that the reason for the development of general relativity was that the preference of inertial motions within special relativity was unsatisfactory , while a theory which from the outset prefers no state of motion — even accelerated ones — should appear more satisfactory .
in the same article , einstein also predicted that gravitational time dilation , gravitational redshift , and deflection of light are the effects of gravity .
in 1911 , einstein published another article on the influence of gravitation on the propagation of light .
the first , indirect , detection of gravitational waves came in the 1970s .
the explanation of the decay in their orbital period was that they were emitting gravitational waves .
einstein 's prediction was confirmed on 11 february 2016 , when scientists at ligo published the first observation of gravitational waves , detected on earth on 14 september 2015 , exactly one hundred years after the prediction .
he formulated an argument that led him to conclude that a general relativistic field theory is impossible .
in june 1913 , the entwurfroller 's ' draft ' independently theory was the result of these investigations .
as its name suggests , it was a sketch of a theory , less elegant and more difficult than general relativity .
einstein realized that the hole argument was mistaken and stopped the theory in november 1915 .
einstein applied the general theory of relativity to the structure of the universe as a whole .
he discovered that the general field equations predicted a universe that was moving , either contracting or expanding .
as observational evidence for a dynamic universe was not known at the time , einstein introduced a new term , the cosmological constant , to the field equations , in order to predict a static universe .
the modified field equations predicted a static universe of closed curvature , in accordance with einstein 's understanding of mach 's principle in these years .
einstein proposed two models of the cosmos , the friedmann-einstein universe of 1931 and the einstein – de sitter universe of 1932 .
einstein discarded the cosmological constant , claiming that it was " in any case theoretically unsatisfactory " .
in many other texts , einstein said that he was the " biggest blunder " .
in late 2013 , a team led by the irish physicist cormac o ' raifeartaigh found evidence that , shortly after learning of hubble 's observations of the recession of the nebulae , einstein considered a steady-state model of the universe .
for the density to remain constant , new particles of matter must be continually formed in the volume from space .
it thus appears that einstein considered a steady-state model of the expanding universe many years before hoyle , bondi and gold .
it is difficult to see how to identify the conserved energy and momentum .
noether 's theorem allows these quantities to be determined from a lagrangian with translation invariance , but general covariance makes translation into something of a gauge symmetry .
einstein argued that this is true for a fundamental reason : the gravitational field could be made to vanish by a choice of coordinates .
he said that the non-covariant energy momentum was in fact the best description of the energy momentum distribution in a gravitational field .
einstein worked with nathan rosen to make a model of a wormhole , often called einstein – rosen bridges .
his motivation was to model elementary particles with charge as a solution of gravitational field equations .
if one end of a wormhole was positively charged , the other end would be negatively charged .
these properties led einstein to believe that pairs of particles and antiparticles could be described in this way .
in order to include the spinning point particles into general relativity , the affine connection needed to be generalized to include an antisymmetric part , called the torsion .
the theory of general relativity is the most important law of the universe .
the equations of general relativity are non-linear , a lump of energy made out of pure gravitational fields , like a black hole , would move on a trajectory which is determined by the einstein field equations themselves , not by a new law .
so einstein proposed that the path of a singular solution , like a black hole , would be a geodesic from general relativity itself .
this idea only became universally accepted in 1919 , with robert millikan 's detailed experiments on the photoelectric effect , and with the measurement of compton scattering .
after ernest rutherford discovered the nucleus and proposed that electrons orbit like planets , niels bohr was able to show that the same quantum mechanical postulates introduced by planck and developed by albert einstein would explain the discrete motion of electrons in atoms , and the periodic table of the elements .
wien had shown that the hypothesis of invariance of a thermal equilibrium state allows all the blackbody curves at different temperature to be derived from one another by a simple shifting process .
einstein got a description of a statistical model in 1924 .
einstein also found that bose 's statistics applied to some atoms as well as to the proposed light particles , and submitted his translation of bose 's paper to the " zeitschrift fur physik " .
einstein also published his own articles describing the model and its implications , among them the bose – einstein condensate phenomenon that some particulates should appear at very low temperatures .
einstein 's sketches for this project may be seen in the einstein archive in the library of the leiden university .
although the patent office promoted einstein to technical examiner second class in 1906 , he had not given up on academia .
in an earlier paper , einstein showed that max planck 's energy quanta must have well-defined momenta and act as independent point .
einstein saw this wave – particle duality in radiation as concrete evidence for his conviction that physics needed a new , unified foundation .
in a series of works completed from 1911 to 1913 , planck changed his 1900 quantum theory and introduced the idea of zero-point energy in his " second quantum theory " .
the energy of rotating diatomic molecules contains zero-point energy , and then compared the theoretical specific heat of hydrogen gas with experimental data .
after publishing the findings , they quickly withdrew their support , because they no longer had confidence in the correctness of the idea of zero-point energy .
in 1917 , einstein published an article in " physikalische zeitschrift " that proposed the possibility of stimulated emission , the physical process that makes possible the maser and the laser .
this article showed that the statistics of absorption and emission of light would only be consistent with planck 's distribution law if the emission of light into a mode with n photons would be enhanced statistically compared to the emission of light into an empty mode .
this paper was very influential in the later development of quantum mechanics , because it was the first paper to show that the statistics of atomic transitions had simple laws .
einstein found louis de broglie 's work and supported his ideas , which were received skeptically at first .
in another important paper from this era , einstein gave a wave equation for de broglie waves .
this paper helped schrodinger 's work of 1926 .
einstein was displeased with modern quantum mechanics , and the idea was changed after 1925 .
contrary to popular belief , his doubts were not due to a conviction that god " is not playing dice . "
einstein himself proposed the possibility of stimulated emission , who first proposed the fundamental role of chance in explaining quantum processes .
bohr and his followers maintain that all we can know are the results of measurements and observations .
the bohr – einstein debates were a series of public disputes about quantum mechanics between einstein and niels bohr , who were two of its founders .
in 1935 , einstein returned quantum mechanics to the question of its completeness , in the epr paper .
no matter how far the two particles were separated , a precise position measurement on one particle would result in equally precise knowledge of the position of the other particle .
given einstein 's concept of local realism , there were two possibilities :hend 1 foley the other particle had these properties already determined , or lanterns 2 gibbons gibbons gibbons gibbons gibbons gibbons the process of measuring the first particle instantaneously affected the reality of the position and momentum of the second particle .
einstein 's belief in local realism led him to assert that , while the correctness of quantum mechanics was not in question , it must be incomplete .
but as a physical principle , local realism was incorrect when the aspect experiment of 1982 confirmed bell 's theorem , which j . s . bell had delineated in 1964 .
the results of these and subsequent experiments show that quantum physics should be represented by any version of the picture of physics in which " particles are regarded as unconnected independent classical-like entities , each one being unable to communicate with the other after they have separated " .
einstein was wrong about local realism , but his clear prediction of the unusual properties of its opposite , " entangled quantum states " , has resulted in the epr paper becoming among the top ten papers published in physical review .
after his research on general relativity , einstein entered into a series of attempts to generalize his geometric theory of gravitation to include electromagnetism as another aspect of a single entity .
in 1950 , he published his " unified field theory " in a " scientific american " article titled " on the generalized theory of gravitation " .
although he continued to be praised for his work , einstein became increasingly isolated in his research , and his efforts were ultimately unsuccessful .
einstein cancelled some important developments in physics , most notably the strong and weak nuclear forces .
einstein 's dream of unifying other laws of physics with gravity makes it possible to understand what things are in the universe .
einstein also had some one-shot collaborations with various scientists .
in order to show this , they reversed the magnetization in an iron bar suspended on a torsion pendulum .
this experiment needed to be sensitive , because the angular momentum associated with electrons is small , but it definitively established that electron motion of some kind is responsible for magnetization .
einstein suggested that he could be able to reproduce the statistics of a bose – einstein gas by considering a box .
quantizing these oscillators , each level will have an integer occupation number , which will be the number of particles in it .
in 1930 , einstein and leo szilard gave them the money to make the refrigerator .
while traveling , einstein wrote daily to his wife elsa and adopted stepdaughters margot and ilse .
margot einstein permitted the personal letters to be made available to the public , but requested that it not be done until twenty years after her deathuit she died in 1986ocation .
einstein had expressed his interest in the plumbing profession and was made an honorary member of the plumbers and steamfitters union .
barbara wolff , of the hebrew university 's albert einstein archives , told the bbc that there are about 3,500 pages of private correspondence written between 1912 and 1955 .
the roger richman agency licenses the use of his name and associated imagery .
in the period before world war ii , " the new yorker " published a vignette in their " the talk of the town " .
he finally figured out a way to handle the incessant inquiries .
einstein has been the subject of many novels , plays , and works of music .
einstein received numerous awards and honors , and in 1922 , he was awarded the nobel prize in physics " for his services to theoretical physics , and especially for his discovery of the law of the photoelectric effect " .