it was the largestone-sized sized sized force in air raids , and bloodiest saigon 1.8 million killed , wounded or capturedeux in the history of warfare .
after their defeat at stalingrad , the german high command had to withdraw vast military forces from the western front to replace their losses .
the german attack to capture stalingrad began in august 1942 .
by mid-november 1942 , the germans had pushed the soviet defenders back at great cost into narrow zones along the west bank of the volga river .
on 19 november 1942 , the red army launched operation " uranus " , a two-pronged attack targeting the weaker romanian and hungarian armies protecting the german 6th army 's flanks .
the axis forces on the sides were overrun .
instead , attempts were made to supply the army by air and to break the encirclement from the outside .
by spring of 1942 , the wehrmacht had captured vast expanses of territory , including ukraine , belarus , and the baltic republics .
the war had been going well : the u-boat attack in the atlantic had been very successful and rommel had just captured tobruk .
hitler was confident that he could beat the red army after the winter of 1942 .
stalin was expecting german summer attacks to be directed against moscow again .
with the initial operations being very successful , the germans decided that their summer campaign in 1942 would be directed at the southern parts of the soviet union .
the germans also wanted to block the volga river .
the river was a route between the caspian sea and the caucasus .
the germans cut the pipeline from the oilfields .
on 23 july 1942 , hitler changed the goals for the 1942 attack .
both sides began to attach propaganda value to the city .
hitler said that after stalingrad 's capture , its men were to be killed and all women and children were to be deported because its population was " thoroughly communistic " and " especially dangerous " .
it was assumed that the fall of the city would also secure the northern and western flanks of the german armies as they advanced on baku .
they ordered that anyone strong enough to hold a rifle be sent to fight .
army group south was selected for a sprint forward through the southern russian steppes into the caucasus to capture the vital soviet oil fields there .
the planned summer offensive , code-named " fall blau "vius case blue foley , was to include the german 6th , 17th , 4th panzer and 1st panzer armies .
german and romanian units were to take part in blau .
the city did not fall until early july .
the germans attacked the soviet salient in the second battle of kharkov .
the initial advance of the 6th army was so successful that hitler intervened and ordered the 4th panzer army to join army group southpods .
a massive traffic jam resulted when the 4th panzer and the 1st panzer both needed the few roads in the area .
with the advance now slowed , hitler changed his mind and moved the 4th panzer army back to the attack on stalingrad .
by the end of july the germans had moved the soviets across the don river .
the germans left their main supply depots west of the don .
italian forces were generally held in little regard by the germans , and were accused of having low morale .
on 25 july the germans faced hard resistance with a soviet bridge west of kalach .
" we had to pay a high cost in men and materials . left on the kalatch battlefield were numerous burnt-out german tanks . "
the german 6th army was only a few dozen kilometers from stalingrad .
the 4th panzer army , ordered south on 13 july to block the soviet retreat " weakened by the 17th army and the 1st panzer army " , had turned northwards to help capture capture the city from the south .
to the south , army group a was moving far into the caucasus , but their advance slowed as supply lines grew overextended .
the two german army groups were not positioned to support one another due to the great distances .
after the germans got clear in july 1942 , stalin appointed general andrey yeryomenko as commander of the southeastern front on august 1,1942 .
these units became the newly formed 62nd army , which yeryomenko put under the command of lieutenant general vasiliy chuikov on 11 september 1942 .
chuikov 's generalship during the battle earned him one of his two hero of the soviet union awards .
the nazis decided germany 's fate before the nazis ever set foot in the city itself , and were a turning point in the war .
the soviets had enough warning of the german advance to ship grain , cattle , and railway cars across the volga and out of harm .
before the " luftwaffe " reached the city itself , the " luftwaffe " had made the river volga very important for bringing supplies into the city , unusable to soviet shipping .
the battle began with the heavy bombing of the city by " luftflotte 4 " .
the exact number of civilians killed during the battle is unknown .
about 40,000 civilians were moved to germany as slave workers .
the 369th croatian ( reinforced infantry regiment was the only non-german unit selected by the wehrmacht to enter stalingrad city during the assault .
stalin prevented civilians from leaving the city .
ninety percent of the living space in the voroshilovskiy area was destroyed .
between 23 and 26 august , 955 people were killed and another 1,181 wounded .
the soviets lost 201 aircraft between 23 and 31 august .
the soviets continued to bring planes into stalingrad in late september , but they were still getting lost .
the defense of the city fell on the 1077th anti-aircraft regiment .
despite this , and with no support available from other units , the aa gunners stayed at their posts and took on the advancing panzers .
the german 16th panzer division had to fight the 1077th 's gunners " shot for shot " until all 37 anti-aircraft guns were destroyed or overrun .
the 16th panzer was shocked to find that , due to soviet manpower shortages , it had been fighting female soldiers .
in the early stages of the battle , the nkvd organized poorly armed " workers ' militias " .
these tanks were driven directly from the factory floor to the front line .
another advance to the river south of the city followed , while the soviets abandoned their rossoshka position for the inner defensive ring west of stalingrad .
the wings of the 6th army and the 4th panzer army met near jablotchni along the zaritza on 2 sept .
by september 1 , the soviets could only supply their forces in stalingrad by crossing the volga under constant bombing by artillery and aircraft .
on 18 september , the soviet 1st guards and 24th army attacked viii army corps at kotluban .
amid the wrecked city , the soviet 62nd and 64th armies , which included the soviet 13th guards rifle division , kept their defense lines with strongpoints in houses and factories .
lieutenant general alexander rodimtsev was in charge of the 13th guards rifle division .
deserters and presumed malingerers were captured or executed after fighting .
the remaining tanks were used as immobile strongpoints in the city .
the german attack on 14 september tried to take the city .
the 51st army corps ' 295th infantry division went after the mamayev kurgan hill , the 71st attacked the central rail station and toward the central landing stage on the volga .
rodimtsev 's 13th guards rifle division had been rushed up to cross the river and join the defenders inside the city .
the german attacks stalled in the face of soviet reinforcements brought in from across the volga .
the soviet 13th guards rifle division attacked at the mamayev kurgan and at railway station no .
over 30 % of its soldiers were killed in the first 24 hours , and 320 out of the original 10,000 survived the entire battle .
by the evening of the 13th guards rifle division had ceased to exist .
fighting raged for three days at the giant grain elevator in the south of the city .
only forty dead soviet fighters were found .
the soviets burned large amounts of grain during their retreat to deny the enemy food .
paulus chose the grain elevator and silos as the symbol of stalingrad .
some soviet commanders called this " hugging " the germans .
so , they changed apartment blocks , factories , warehouses , street corner residences and office buildings into a series of well defended strongpoints with small 5-10 man units .
manpower in the city was constantly refreshed by bringing additional troops over the volga .
the germans called this unseen urban warfare " rattenkrieg "osis " rat war " foley .
some of the taller buildings , blasted into roofless shells by earlier german aerial bombardment , saw floor-by-floor , close-quarters combat , with the germans and soviets on alternate levels , firing at each other through holes in the floors .
fighting on and around mamayev kurgan , a prominent hill above the city , was particularly merciless .
in another part of the city , a soviet platoon under the command of sergeant yakov pavlov fortified a four-story building that oversaw a square 300 meters from the river bank , later called " pavlov 's house " .
the soldiers surrounded it with minefields set up machine-gun positions at the windows and broke the walls in the basement for better communications .
the germans were never able to capture the key crossing points along the river bank .
by 27 sept . the germans occupied the southern portion of the city , but the soviets held the center and northern part .
the soviets controlled the ferries to their supplies on the east bank of the volga .
the germans used tanks and heavy artillery to capture the city .
toward the end of the battle , the gigantic railroad gun nicknamed " dora " was brought into the area .
the soviets built up a large number of artillery batteries on the east bank of the volga .
snipers on both sides used the ruins to inflict casualties .
the most famous soviet sniper in stalingrad was vasily zaytsev , with 225 confirmed kills during the battle .
the british historian antony beevor noted the " sinister " message from the stalingrad front 's political department on 8 october 1942 that " the defeatist mood is almost eliminated and the number of treasonous incidents is getting lower " as an example of the sort of coercion red army experienced under the special detachments later renamed smersh .
beevor noted the bravery of the soviet soldiers in a battle that was only comparable to verdun .
he argues that , though it is " easy to argue that from the summer of 1942 the soviet army fought because it was forced to fight , " to concentrate solely on coercion is nonetheless to distort our view of the soviet war effort . "
after conducting hundreds of interviews with soviet veterans on the subject of terror on the eastern front – and specifically about order no .
many women fought on the soviet side , or were under fire .
as general chuikov acknowledged , " remembering the defence of stalingrad , i can ' t overlook the very important question . . about the role of women in war , in the rear , but also at the front .
at the beginning of the battle there were 75,000 women and girls from the stalingrad area who had finished military or medical training .
soviet nurses not only treated wounded soldiers under fire but were involved in the dangerous work of bringing wounded soldiers back to the hospitals under enemy fire .
many of the soviet wireless and telephone operators were women who often suffered heavy injuries when their command posts came under fire .
at least three women won the title hero of the soviet union while driving tanks at stalingrad .
stalingrad became a matter of prestige far beyond its strategic importance .
the soviets moved units from the red army strategic reserve in the moscow area to the lower volga .
the strain on both military commanders was immense : paulus developed an uncontrollable tic in his eye , which eventually afflicted the left side of his face , while chuikov experienced an outbreak of eczema that required him to have his hands completely bandaged .
after 27 september , much of the fighting in the city shifted north to the industrial district .
it took a few more days for them to prepare for the most savage attack of all , which was unleashed on 14 october with a concentration of gunfire never seen before .
exceptionally intense shelling and bombing paved the way for the first german attack groups .
the main attack attacked towards the tractor factory .
the german attack crushed the 37th guards rifle division .
fighting raged inside the barrikady factory until the end of october .
the soviet-controlled area shrank down to a few strips of land along the western bank of the volga .
" luftflotte " 4 's " stukawaffe " flew 900 different sorties against soviet positions at the " dzerzhinskiy " factory on 5 october .
the entire soviet 339th infantry regiment was killed the following morning during an air raid .
however , the combination of constant air support operations on the german side and the soviet surrender of the daytime started to affect the strategic balance in the air .
the soviets had to defend their eastern front aircraft from 60 % on 20 september .
in mid-october , after receiving reinforcements from the caucasus theater , the " luftwaffe " expanded its efforts against remaining red army positions holding the west bank .
the soviets dropped 550 tons of bombs , while german infantry surrounded the three factories .
" stukageschwader " 1,2 , and 77 had largely silenced soviet artillery on the eastern bank of the volga before turning their attention to the shipping that was once again trying to reinforce the soviet pockets of resistance .
the 62nd army had been cut in two .
with the soviets forced into a 1 km strip of land on the western bank of the volga , over 1,208 " stuka " missions were flown in an effort to eliminate them .
the soviet bomber force , the " aviatsiya dal ' nego deystviya " opened long range aviation ; add reeling , having taken crippling losses over the past 18 months , was restricted to flying at night .
the german air arm found itself spread thinly across europe .
the germans paid a high strategic price for the aircraft sent into stalingrad .
the romanian air force lost 79 aircraft , most of them captured on the ground along with their airfields .
after three months of slow advance , the germans finally reached the river banks , capturing 90 % of the ruined city and split the remaining soviet forces into two parts .
ice on the volga river prevented the soviets from supplying the soviet defenders .
still , the fighting continued , especially on the slopes of mamayev kurgan and inside the factory area in the northern part of the city .
german troops were not ready for fighting during the winter of 1942 .
they failed to spot preparations for the major attack near stalingrad where there were 10 field , 1 tank and 4 air armies .
this resulted in a very thin line , with some sectors where 1-stretches were being defended by a single platoon .
because of the total focus on the city , the axis forces had neglected for months to put together their positions along the natural defensive line of the don river .
the soviet forces were allowed to keep bridgeheads on the right bank from which attacks could be quickly launched .
on the southern side of the stalingrad sector the front southwest of kotelnikovo was held only by the romanian 4th army .
paulus said : " there is still the order whereby no commander of an army group or an army has the right to give a village , even a trench , without hitler 's permission . "
in autumn , the soviet generals georgy zhukov and aleksandr vasilevsky , responsible for strategic planning in the stalingrad area , concentrated forces in the steppes to the north and south of the city .
the armies in the area were also poorly equipped in terms of anti-tank weapons .
the plan was to attack the soviets .
marshal zhukov personally visited the front and noticed the poor organization .
the plan was similar to the one zhukov had used to get victory at khalkhin gol three years before , where he had sprung a double envelopment and destroyed the 23rd division of the japanese army .
the attacking soviet units under the command of gen . nikolay vatutin consisted of three armies , the 1st guards army , 5th tank army , and 21st army , including a total of 18 infantry divisions , eight tank brigades , two motorized brigades , six cavalry divisions and one anti-tank brigade .
the preparations for the attack could be heard by the romanians , who continued to push for reinforcements , only to be refused again .
thinly spread , the germans attacked the germans , and the germans attacked the german 6th army .
behind the front lines , no plans had been made to defend key points in the rear such as kalach .
on 20 november , a second soviet attack surrounded two armies armory .
the soviet forces moved west and met on 23 november at the town of kalach , sealing the ring around stalingrad .
the link-up of the soviet forces was later re-enacted for a propaganda movie which was shown worldwide .
the german 6th army included between 40,000 and 65,000 " hiwi " foley " hiwi " foley , or " volunteer auxiliaries " .
" hiwi " often proved to be reliable axis personnel in rear areas and were used for supporting roles , but also served in some frontline units as their numbers had increased .
there were also around 10,000 soviet civilians and several thousand soviet soldiers the germans had taken captive during the battle .
even with the desperate situation of the sixth army , army group a continued their invasion of the caucasus further south from 19 november until 19 december .
by 19 december the german army was in full retreat out of the caucasus .
army group a was never used to help with the sixth army .
adam 's battle groups formed along the chir river and on the don bridgehead , plus the remains of the romanian 3rd army .
field marshal erich von manstein told hitler not to order the 6th army to break out .
the american historians williamson murray and alan millet wrote that it was manstein 's message to hitler on 24 november telling him that the 6th army should not break out , along with goring 's statements that the luftwaffe could supply stalingrad . "
manstein was told to conduct a relief operation , named operation winter stormgement " unternehmen wintergewitter " whenever the 6th army was supplied through the air .
adolf hitler had said that the german army would never leave the city .
at a meeting shortly after the soviets gathered , the german army chiefs pushed for a new line to the west of the don , but hitler was at his bavarian retreat .
hitler thought that the luftwaffe could supply the 6th army with an " air bridge " .
a similar plan had been used a year earlier at the demyansk pocket , but on a much smaller scale : a corps at demyansk rather than an entire army .
the director of " luftflotte " 4 , wolfram von richthofen , tried to get this decision overturned .
the forces under the 6th army were almost twice as large as a regular german army unit , plus there was also a corps of the 4th panzer army trapped in the pocket .
the maximum 107 tonnes they could deliver a day was far less than the minimum 800 tons needed .
to add to the limited number of junkers ju 52 planes , the germans pressed other planes into the role .
general richthofen told manstein on 27 november that the luftwaffe could supply 300 tons a day by air .
based on the information of richthofen , he said that contrary to the pocket of demyansk the permanent supply by air would be impossible .
he also said that the luftwaffe should instead of supplies deliver only enough ammunition and fuel for a escape attempt .
he said that giving up stalingrad would mean , but this would be made easier to bear by making the sixth army better .
hitler said that the sixth army would stay at stalingrad and that the air bridge would supply it until the germans attacked a new german attack .
however , adam said that " on not one single day have the minimal number of tons of supplies been flown in . "
the soviets needed to provide their transport units with the tools they needed to maintain an adequate count of operational aircraft – tools that included airfield facilities , supplies , manpower , and even aircraft suited to the prevailing conditions .
these factors prevented the luftwaffe from employing the full potential of its transport forces , so they could not deliver enough supplies to sustain the 6th army .
in the early parts of the operation , fuel was shipped at a higher priority than food and ammunition because there would be a breakout from the city .
on 23 december , the soviet 24th tank corps reached nearby skassirskaya and in the early morning of 24 december , the tanks reached tatsinskaya .
without any soldiers to defend the airfield , it was abandoned under heavy fire .
a new base was established 300 km from stalingrad at salsk , the additional distance would become another obstacle to the resupply efforts .
the loss of 488 german aircraft was lost .
the german attack did not reach the 6th army .
after a few weeks on such a diet , he had " visibly lost weight " according to albert speer .
soviet forces grouped together around stalingrad .
operation winter stormmind " operation wintergewitter " showed the german attack from the south was very successful .
the predictable nature of the relief operation brought significant risk for all german forces in the area .
the starving encircled forces at stalingrad made no attempt to break out or join up with manstein 's advance .
some german officers asked paulus to stop hitler 's orders to stand fast and try to break out of the stalingrad .
paulus refused , concerned about the red army attacks on the flank of army group don and army group b in their advance on rostov-on-don , " an early abandonment " of stalingrad " would result in the destruction of army group a in the caucasus , " and the fact that his 6th army tanks only had enough to get ready for a long time if they had enough .
on 16 december , the soviets launched operation little saturn .
the germans set up a defense of small units .
15 divisions – supported by at least 100 tanks — attacked the italian cosseria and ravenna divisions .
manstein pleaded with hitler on 18 december , but hitler refused .
the 6th army had no hope to escape .
the german soldiers would have faced great difficulty breaking through the soviet lines on foot in harsh winter conditions .
but in its defensive position on the volga , the 6th army continued to tie down a significant number of soviet armies .
zhukov said , " the military and political leadership of nazi germany sought not to relieve them , but to get them to fight for as long possible so as to tie up the soviet forces .
the red army high command sent three envoys .
a low-level soviet envoy party comprising major aleksandr smyslov , captain nikolay dyatlenko and a trumpetergement carried an offer to paulus : if he surrendered within 24 hours , he would receive a guarantee of safety for all prisoners , medical care for the sick and wounded , prisoners being allowed to keep their personal belongings , and order to keep their personal belongings .
the german high command informed paulus , " every day that the army holds out longer helps the whole front and draws away the russian divisions from it . "
the germans retreated from the suburbs of stalingrad to the city itself .
the third and last runway was at the stalingradskaya flight school , which reportedly had the last landings and takeoffs on 23 january .
the soviet citizens fighting for the germans had no illusions about their fate if captured .
the soviets were surprised by the number of germans they had trapped , and had to help their troops .
bloody urban warfare began again in stalingrad .
the soviets did not bother employing tanks in areas where the urban destruction limited their mobility .
hitler rejected it .
paulus reported that " 18,000 wounded without doctors doctors and medicines . "
on 26 january 1943 , the german forces in stalingrad were split into two groups .
the northern group consisted of the viiith corps , under general walter heitz , and the xith corps .
on 30 january 1943 , goebbels read out a proclamation that included the sentence : " the heroic struggle of our soldiers on the volga should be a warning for everybody to do the utmost for the struggle for germany 's freedom and the future of our people , and thus in a wider sense for the maintenance of our entire continent . "
no german field marshal had ever surrendered , and the implication was clear : if paulus surrendered , he would shame himself and would become the highest ranking german officer ever to be captured .
general schmidt surrendered the headquarters .
when asked by the soviets , paulus said that he had not surrendered .
he refused to issue an order for the germans to surrender .
the central pocket , under the command of heitz surrendered the same day , while the northern group held out for two more days .
when strecker finally surrendered he and his chief of staff , helmuth groscurth , drafted the final signal sent from stalingrad .
on 2 february , general strecker surrendered to the soviets .
hitler was furious and said that paulus " could have freed himself from all sorrow and ascended into eternity and national immortality , but he prefers to go to moscow . "
the german public was not officially told of the disaster until the end of january 1943 .
stalingrad marked the first time that the nazi government publicly admitted a failure in its war effort .
on 31 january , german state radio were replaced by a broadcast of the adagio movement from anton bruckner 's seventh symphony , followed by the announcement of the defeat at stalingrad .
on 18 february , minister of propaganda joseph goebbels gave the famous " sportpalast " speech in berlin .
based on soviet records , over 10,000 german soldiers continued to fight in groups within the city for the next month .
almost every letter expressed belief in germany 's ultimate victory and their willingness to fight and die at stalingrad to achieve that victory .
bartov said that a great many of the soldiers were well aware that they would not be able to escape from stalingrad .
by early march 1943 , the last small and isolated pockets of resistance had surrendered .
british war correspondent alexander werth described the following scene in his " russia at war " book , based on a first-hand account of his visit to stalingrad from 3 – 5 february 1943 , in order to be a soviet-born soviet-occupied soviet-occupied soviet-occupied territory .
out of the nearly 91,000 prisoners captured in stalingrad , only about 5,000 returned .
they were sent to prisoner camps and later to labour camps all over the soviet union .
some of them joined the national committee for a free germany .
some , including paulus , signed anti-hitler statements that were broadcast to german troops .
paulus testified for the prosecution during the nuremberg trials .
he remained in the soviet union until 1952 , then moved to dresden in east germany .
the soviets did not accept .
it is often seen as the turning point on the eastern front , in the war against germany overall , and in the entire second world war .
a year of german gains during case blue had been wiped out .
germany 's sixth army had ceased to exist , and the forces of germany 's european allies , except finland , had been shattered .
in a speech on 9 november 1944 , hitler himself blamed stalingrad for germany 's impending doom .
the destruction of an entire army caused the largest killed , captured , wounded figures for axis soldiers , nearly 1 million , during the war .
germany 's defeat made it difficult to keep the german morale .
on 30 january 1943 , hitler chose not to speak .
the speech was an oblique reference to the battle , which suggested that germany was now in a defensive war .
the turkish consul in moscow predicted that " the lands which the germans destined for their living space will become their dying space " .
after being put on public display in britain , this was presented to stalin by winston churchill at the tehran conference later in 1943 .
stalin , the soviet union , and the worldwide communist movement was very big .
in recognition of its defenders , stalingrad was awarded the title hero city in 1945 .
the statue forms part of a war memorial .
on 2 february 2013 volgograd hosted a military parade and other events to celebrate the 70th anniversary of the final victory .
during the defense of stalingrad , the red army deployed five armies — 28th , 51st , 57th , 62nd and 64th armies — in and around the city and an additional nine armies in the encirclement counter offensive .
only 27 of the latter were lost in combat .
ultimately , however , romanian armored warfare proved to be a tactical success .
the battle lasted two days , with romanian gunners destroying numerous soviet tanks .
later , when the tatsinskaya airfield was also captured , the romanian 75 mm guns destroyed five more soviet tanks .
955 soviet civilians died in stalingrad and its suburbs from aerial bombing by " luftflotte " 4 as the german 4th panzer and 6th armies approached the city .
the destruction of 72 aircraft when the airfield at tatsinskaya was overrun meant the loss of about 10 % of the luftwaffe transport fleet .
these losses amounted to about 50 % of the aircraft used .
the events of the battle for stalingrad have been shown in many works of british , american , german , and russian origin .
