they can range from simple dwellings such as hut of nomadic tribes and the improvised shacks in shantytowns to complex , fixed structures of wood , brick , concrete or other materials containing plumbing , ventilation , and electrical systems .
houses use a range of different roofing systems to keep precipitation such as rain from getting into the dwelling space .
houses may have doors or locks to protect the people and contents from burglars .
domestic animals such as chickens or larger livestock rustling may share part of the house with humans .
some houses only have a dwelling space for one family or similar-sized group .
a house may be accompanied by outbuildings , such as a garage for vehicles or a shed for gardening equipment and tools .
the english word " house " comes from the old english " hus " meaning dwelling , shelter , home , house .
feng shui , originally a chinese method of moving houses according to such factors as rain and micro-climates , has recently expanded its scope to address the design of interior spaces , with a view to promoting harmonious effects on the people living inside the house , although no actual effect has ever been demonstrated .
feng shui can also mean the " aura " in or around a dwelling .
the square footage of a house in the united states says the area of " living space " , excluding the garage and other non-living spaces .
the square metres figure of a house in europe reports the area of the walls enclosing the home .
these may include a living / eating area , a sleeping area , and gaston if suitable facilities and services exist .
in traditional agriculture-oriented societies , domestic animals such as chickens or larger livestock aarhus like cattle rustling often share part of the house with human beings .
a typical " foursquare house " occurred commonly in the early history of the usa where they were mainly built .
little is known about the earliest origin of the house and its interior .
the first form of architecture was a frame of timber branches finished in mud .
their lifestyles were largely communal , as areas such as the great hall enforced the custom of dining and meetings and the solar intended for shared sleeping beds .
unlike the qualities and uses of the manor houses , most rooms of the palazzo contained no purpose , yet were given several doors .
the layout allowed people to walk room from one door to another , thus breaking the boundaries of privacy .
an early example of the segregation of rooms and consequent enhancement of privacy may be found in 1597 at the beaufort house built in chelsea .
this new extension was revolutionary at the time .
english architect sir roger pratt says " the common way in the whole length of the house , avoids the offices from one molesting the other by continual passing through them . "
this social divide between rich and poor favored the physical integration of the corridor into housing by the 19th century .
the rooms were changed from public to private .
the 17th century dutch house was smaller , and was only inhabited by up to four to five members .
this was due to their " self-reliance " , in contrast to the dependence on servants , and a design for a lifestyle centered on the family .
house layouts also added the idea of the corridor as well as the importance of function and privacy .
by the end of the 17th century , the house was changed to become employment-free .
by the mid-20th century , the high-tech equipment was a shift in which the contemporary doctor typically works from an office or hospital .
the introduction of technology and electronic systems within the house has questioned the impressions of privacy as well as the segregation of work from home .
work has been altered because of the increase of communications .
although commuting is reduced , " the desire to separate working and living remains apparent . "
in jonathan hill 's book " immature architecture " , he says that this new invasion of privacy was " electromagnetic weather " .
natural or man-made weather remains concurrent inside or outside the house , but the electromagnetic weather is able to generate within both positions .
in the united states , modern house-construction techniques include light-frame construction strategies in areas with access to supplies of woodbery and adobe or sometimes rammed-earth construction across areas with scarce wood-resources .
more generally , people often build houses out of the nearest available material .
for example , a large fraction of american houses use wood .
the original idea was to use the labor force inside a shelter during inclement weather .
more recently builders have begun to work with structural engineers who use computers and finite element analysis to design prefabricated steel framed homes with known resistance to high wind loads and seismic forces .
though not in wide use , these methods frequently appeal to homeowners who may become actively involved in the construction process .
one tool of earthquake engineering is base isolation .
base isolation is a collection of structural elements of a building that should break up from the shaking ground thus protecting the building 's integrity and enhancing its seismic performance .
normally , excavations are made around the building and the building is separated from the foundations .
steel beams replace the connections to the foundations .
while the " base isolation " tends to restrict transmission of the ground motion to the building , it also keeps the building properly over the foundation .
careful attention to detail is required where the building interfaces with the ground , especially at entrances , stairways and ramps , to ensure sufficient relative motion of those structural elements .
bamboo is very strong , because it comes from fast-grow plants .
in many parts of the world , the houses are constructed using stone materials .
in manila 's payatas neighborhood , slum houses are often made of garbage that comes from a nearby garbage dump .
in dakar , it is not uncommon to see houses made of recycled materials standing atop a mixture of garbage and sand which serves as a foundation .
the garbage-sand mixture is also used to protect the house from flooding .
new houses in the uk are not covered by the sale of goods act .
when purchasing a new house the buyer has different legal protection than buying other products .
a more systematic and general approach to identifying houses may use various ways of numbering .
humans often build houses for domestic animals .
houses may express the opinions of their builders or their people .
thus a vast house may serve as a sign of conspicuous wealth whereas a low-profile house built of recycled materials may indicate support of energy conservation .
houses of particular historical significance caused by historic houses to be used to protect historic houses .
contrast to house-destruction , tent dwelling and house rebuilding in the wake of many natural disasters .
