voltage is the change in electric potential between two places .
the difference in electric potential between two points is defined as the work needed to move a test charge between the two points .
in the international system of units , the derived unit for voltage is named volt .
in si units , work per unit charge is expressed as joules per coulomb .
the si definition for " volt " uses power and current .
this definition is equivalent to the more commonly used ' joules per coulomb ' .
voltage or electric potential difference is denoted by ∆ " v " , but more often simply as " v " .
electric potential differences between points can be caused by electric charge , by electric current through a magnetic field , or by time-varying magnetic fields .
a voltmeter can be used to measure the voltage difference between two points in a system .
a voltage may be either a source of energy — lost , used , or stored energy fragments .
there are several useful ways to define voltage .
there are also other useful definitions of work per charge greenberg .
positively charged objects are pulled towards lower voltages .
the conventional current in a wire or resistor always flows from higher voltage to lower voltage .
historically , voltage has been referred to as " tension " and " pressure " .
even today , the term " tension " is still used .
the voltage increase from some point formula _ 1 to some point formula _ 2 is given by
in this case , the voltage increase from point a to point b is equal to the work which would have to be done per unit charge , against the electric field , to move the charge from a to b without causing any acceleration .
this is the line integral of the electric field along that path .
the voltage difference between two points is defined when the electric force is not a conservative force in such cases .
if voltage is used , any circuit where there are time-varying magnetic fields , such as inductors , will not have a well-defined voltage between nodes in the circuit .
if the magnetic field is made of a lot of different things , then the electric field is conservative in the region .
in this case , the voltage across an inductor , viewed externally , turns out to be turned out to be the same .
the electric field in the coil is zero .
the electric potential is defined when magnetic fields change with time .
in physics , it is useful to generalize the electric potential by considering the conservative part of the electric field .
where formula _ 6 is the magnetic vector potential .
the above decomposition is justified by helmholtz 's theorem .
in this case , the voltage increase from formula _ 1 to formula _ 2 is given by
where formula _ 10 is the rotational electric field of the magnetic field .
in this case , the voltage between points is always defined .
in circuit analysis and electrical engineering , the voltage across an inductor is not considered to be zero or undefined , as the definition would suggest .
this is because electrical engineers use a lumped element model to represent and analyze circuits .
when using a lumped element model , it is assumed that there are no magnetic fields in the region surrounding the circuit and that the effects of these are contained in ' lumped elements ' , which are idealized and self-contained circuit elements used to model physical components .
if the assumption of leaked fields is too inaccurate , their effects can be modelled by parasitic components .
in the case of a physical inductor though , the lumped representation is often accurate .
this is because the leaked fields of the inductor are generally negligible , especially if the inductor is a toroid .
if leaked fields are negligible , we find that if leaked fields are negligible .
path-independent is path -lrb- or path -rrb- across the inductor 's terminals .
measurements with a voltmeter across an inductor are often independent of the placement of the test leads .
the voltɕ symbol : v fivb is the derived unit for electric potential difference , and electromotive force .
the volt is named in honour of alessandro voltairus , who invented the voltaic pile , possibly the first chemical battery .
a simple analogy for an electric circuit is water flowing in a closed circuit of pipework , driven by a mechanical pump .
this is called a " water circuit " .
the potential difference between two points is the pressure difference between two points .
if the pump creates a pressure difference between two points , then water flowing from one point to the other will be able to do work .
similarly , work can be done by an electric current driven by a battery .
for example , the voltage provided by a sufficiently-charged automobile battery can " push " a large current through the windings of an automobile 's starter motor .
if the pump is not working , it produces no pressure difference , and the turbine will not rotate .
likewise , if the car 's battery is very weak or " dead " ɔ or " flat "color , then it will not turn the starter motor .
the hydraulic analogy is a useful way of understanding many electrical concepts .
in such a system , the work done to move water is equal to the pressure multiplied by the volume of the water moved .
in an electrical circuit , the work done to move electrons or other charge-carriers is equal to " electrical pressure " multiplied by the quantity of electrical charges moved .
in relation to " flow " , the larger the " pressure difference " between two points across the water is the difference between the actual flow between themocks .
specifying a voltage measurement requires explicit or implicit specification of the points across which the voltage is measured .
when using a voltmeter to measure potential difference , one electrical lead of the voltmeter must be connected to the first point , one to the second point .
the term " voltage " is used to describe the voltage that is dropped across an electrical device litter .
the difference between measurements at each terminal of the device can be understood .
the voltage drop is the change in the difference between the two readings .
two points in an electric circuit that are connected by an ideal conductor without resistance and not within a changing magnetic field have a voltage of zero .
any two points with the same potential may be connected by a conductor and no current will flow between them .
the voltage between " a " and " c " is the sum of the voltage between " a " and " b " and the voltage between " b " and " c " .
the various voltages in a circuit can be computed using kirchhoff 's circuit laws .
when talking about alternating current shouldn , there is a difference between instantaneous voltage and average voltage .
instantaneous voltages can be added for direct currentstered and ac .
some of the tools for measuring the voltage are the voltmeter , the potentiometer , and the oscilloscope .
analog voltmeters , such as moving-coil instruments , work by measuring the current through a fixed resistor .
the voltage is balanced by the unknown voltage of a bridge .
the cathode-ray oscilloscope works by amplifying the voltage and using it to deflect an electron beam from a straight path .
a common voltage for flashlight batteries is 1.5 voltsports dc coulter .
a common voltage for automobile batteries is 12 voltsports .
common voltages supplied by power companies to consumers are 110 to 120 voltsivating acorine .
the voltage in electric power distribution lines can be several hundred times greater than consumer voltages .
the voltage used in overhead lines to power railway locomotives is between 12 kv and 50 kvamen acdilly or between 1.5 kv and 3 kvamenamen dcmorphism .
the energy of an electron is affected by the average electric potential , but also by the specific thermal and atomic environment that it is in .
it measures the electrostatic potential difference , but instead something else that is affected by thermodynamics .
the quantity measured by a voltmeter is the negative of the difference of the electrochemical potential of electronsloid fermi levelologies divided by the electron charge .
the terms " voltage " and " electric potential " are ambiguous in that , in practice , they can refer to " either " of these in different contexts .
the term " electromotive force " was first used by volta in a letter to giovanni aldini in 1798 .
volta meant by this a force that was not an electrostatic force , specifically an electrochemical force .
the term was first used by michael faraday in the 1820s .
however , a clear definition of voltage and method of measuring it had not been developed at this time .
volta distinguished emf from " tension " – potential differencedilly : the observed potential difference at the terminals of an electrochemical cell when it was open circuit must exactly balance the emf of the cell so that no current flowed .
