fat is one of the three main types of nutrient .
fat is made up of mainly carbon and hydrogen atoms .
fat is used in the strict sense of lipid , but fat is used in food science .
they are a necessary part of the diet of most heterotrophs including humans measurements .
some fatty acids are essential because they produce in the body from simpler constituents .
fats and other lipids are broken down in the body by enzymes called lipases produced in the pancreas .
fats that are saturated fats have no double bonds between the carbons in the chain .
the two are double bonded to one carbon chain .
thus alpha-linolenic acid is called an omega-3 fatty acid .
it can be changed by changing the hydrogen in a catalyst .
this action , called hydrogenation , breaks all the double bonds and makes a fully saturated fat .
to make vegetable shortening , then liquid " cis "-unsaturated fats such as vegetable oil are hydrogenated to produce saturated fats .
saturated fats can stack themselves in a closely packed arrangement .
for example , animal fats tallow and lard are high in saturated fatty acid content and are solids .
fats serve both as energy sources for the body , and as stores for energy in excess of what the body needs immediately .
fats are broken down in the healthy body to release their constituents , glycerol and fatty acids .
glycerol is a source of energy .
there are many different kinds of fats .
as a simple visual illustration , if the kinks and angles of these chains were straightened out , the molecule would have the shape of a capital letter e .
the fatty acids would each be a horizontal line .
the longer its chain is .
long chains are more susceptible to intermolecular forces of attractionlity in this case , and so the longer ones melt at a higher temperature temperature temperatureened melting pointuration .
fatty acid chains may also differ by length , often categorized as short to very long .
any of these aliphatic fatty acid chains may be glycerated .
most fats found in food , whether vegetable or animal , are made up of medium to long-chain fatty acids , usually of equal or nearly equal length .
many cell types use either glucose or fatty acids for this energy .
even though it is so far , fatty acids can also be used as a source of fuel for brain cells .
fat is also sources of essential fatty acids , an important dietary requirement .
when a substance reaches unsafe levels in the bloodstream , the body can effectively dilute .
this helps to protect vital organs until such time as the offending substances can be removed from the body by such means as excretion , urination , accidental or intentional bloodletting , sebum excretion , and hair growth .
adipose tissue is the body 's means of storing metabolic energy over long periods of time .
under energy stress these cells may degrade their stored fat to supply fatty acids and also glycerol to the circulation .
the location of the tissue determines its metabolic profile : visceral fat is in the abdominal walliness .
visceral fat was recently discovered to be a significant producer of signalling chemicals – i . e . , hormones coulter , among which several are involved in inflammatory tissue responses .
studies have found that replacing saturated fats with " cis " unsaturated fats in the diet reduces risk of cardiovascular disease .
for example , a 2015 systematic review of randomized control trials by the cochrane library concluded : " lifestyle advice to all those at risk of cardiovascular disease and to lower risk population groups should continue to include permanent reduction of dietary saturated fats and partial replacement by unsaturated fats . "
the harvard school of public health teaches that " trans " fats and saturated fats with cis -lrb- monounsaturated fats -rrb- should be good for health .
a 2014 study of randomized controlled trials found that reducing fat and cholesterol intake does not affect cardiovascular disease or all cause deaths .
