the declaration of arbroatheux , also called the declaration of independence , was a declaration of scottish independence in 1320 .
it was in the form of a letter in latin submitted to pope john xxii , dated 6 april 1320 .
bernard of kilwinning , then chancellor of scotland and abbot of arbroath , is believed to have been written in the abbey .
the others were a letter from the king of scots , robert i , and a letter from four scottish bishops which all made similar points .
the declaration was part of a broader diplomatic campaign which sought to claim scotland 's position as an independent kingdom , rather than being a feudal land controlled by england 's norman kings , as well as the excommunication of robert the bruce .
the pope had recognised edward i of england 's claim to overlordship of scotland in 1305 .
the declaration made a number of points : that scotland had always been independent , indeed for longer than england ; that edward i of england had unjustly attacked scotland and perpetrated atrocities ; that robert the bruce delivered the scottish nation from this peril ; and , most controversially , that the independence of scotland was the prerogative of the scottish people , rather than the king of scots .
in fact , the nobility would choose someone else to be king if bruce proved to be unfit in maintaining scotland 's independence .
some interpreted this last point as an early expression of ' popular sovereignty ' .
modern scottish nationalists point to the “ declaration ” as evidence of the long-term persistence of the scots as a distinct national community , giving a very early date for the emergence of nationalism .
however , " the overwhelming majority of academics challenge this vision .
scholars point out that definitions change with time .
the meaning of the word was similar to nation during the ancient and medieval periods was often quite different than it is today .
it has also been argued that the declaration was not a statement of popular sovereignty ; and that its signatories would have had no such concept ; a statement of royal propaganda supporting bruce 's faction .
william wallace and andrew de moray had rebelled against him in 1297 .
the reason given in the declaration is that bruce was able to defend scotland from english aggression .
the idea of a contract between king and people was advanced to the pope as a justification for bruce 's coronation whilst john de balliol was still in papal custody .
there are 39 names — eight earls and thirty one barons — at the start of the document , all of whom may have had their seals appended , probably over the space of some weeks and months , with nobles sending in their seals to be used .
only 19 people are named in the document .
it is thought that at least 11 more seals than the original 39 might have been added .
the declaration was then taken to the papal court at avignon by bishop adam gordon and sir odard de maubuisson .
the pope had to wait out the arguments that the pope wanted to get support from the scots for his crusade if they no longer had to fear english invasion .
he encouraged edward ii to make peace with the scots , but the next year was again persuaded by the english to take their side and issued six bulls to that effect .
edward iii signed a peace treaty with scotland and england , the treaty of edinburgh-northampton .
in this treaty , which was in effect for five years until 1333 , edward renounced all english claims to scotland .
in october 1328 , the interdict on scotland , and the excommunication of its king , were removed by the pope .
the original copy of the declaration was sent to avignon .
a copy of the declaration survives among scotland 's state papers , held by the national archives of scotland in edinburgh .
the most widely known english translation was made by sir james fergusson , formerly keeper of the records of scotland , from text that he reconstructed using this extant copy and early copies of the original draft .
listed below are the signers of the declaration of arbroath in 1320 .
although it includes several consistent bruce loyalists , it includes others who had opposed bruce , or whom bruce tried for plotting against him a few months later , and others of whom little is known .
the declaration is written in latin .
in some cases the spelling of names has changed over the years .
this list generally uses the titles of the signatories ' wikipedia biographies .
the united states declaration of independence was signed on 6 april 1320 .
however , this influence is disputed by some historians .
even says it is speculative and not based on any sources .
in 2016 , the united nations declaration of arbroath was added on unesco 's memory of the world register .
