in roman catholic , eastern orthodox , anglican , oriental orthodox , and lutheran doctrine , all of their faithful deceased in heaven are considered to be saints , but some are worthy of greater honor or emulation ; official ecclesiastical recognition , and consequently veneration , is given to some saints through the process of canonization in the eastern orthodox church .
the english word " saint " is also used in christianity , but historians of religion now use the appellation of special holiness that many religions attribute to certain people .
depending on the religion , saints are recognized either by official ecclesiastical declaration , as in the catholic faith , or by popular acclamationmity .
the word " αγιος " appears 229 times in the greek new testament , and its english translation 60 times in the corresponding text of the king james version of the bible .
, and responds by saying that in the symbolic infrastructure of some religions , there is the image of a certain extraordinary spiritual king 's miraculous powers , to whom frequently a certain moral presence is attributed .
they exert " powerful attractive influence on followers but touch the inner lives of others in transforming ways as well " .
these may include our own mothers , grandmothers or other loved ones .
the title " saint " is a person who has been formally canonized , that is , officially and authoritatively declared a saint , by the church as holder of the keys of the kingdom of heaven , and therefore is believed to be in heaven by the grace of god .
sometimes the word " saint " also means living christians .
in his book " saint of the day " , editor leonard foley , ofm says this : the " saints ' surrender to god 's love was so generous an approach to the total surrender of jesus that the church recognizes them as heroes and heroines worthy to be held up for our inspiration .
they remind us that the church is holy , can never stop being holy and is called to show the holiness of god by living the life of christ . "
according to the catholic church , article 1,61 , " the patriarchs , prophets , and certain other old testament figures have been and always will be honored as saints in all the church 's liturgical traditions . "
on 3 january 993 , pope john xv became the first pope to proclaim a person a saint from outside the diocese of rome : on the petition of the german ruler , he had canonized bishop ulrich of augsburg .
before that time , the popular " cults " of saints had been local and spontaneous and were confirmed by the local bishop .
pope benedict viii later declared the armenian hermit symeon to be a saint , but it was not until the pontificate of pope innocent iii that the popes reserved to themselves the exclusive authority to canonize saints , so that local bishops needed the confirmation of the pope .
walter of pontoise was canonized by an authority other than the pope : hugh de boves , the archbishop of rouen , canonized him in 1153 .
then a decree of pope alexander iii in 1170 reserved the prerogative of canonization to the pope , insofar as the latin church was concerned .
one source says that " there are over 10,000 named saints and beatified people from history , the roman martyrology and orthodox sources , but no definitive head count " .
monsignor robert sarno , an official of the congregation for the causes of saints of the holy see , said that it is impossible to say that there are no saints .
according to the church , divine worship is reserved only to godcifully and never to the saints .
a saint may be a patron saint of a cause , profession , or invoked as a protector against specific illnesses or disasters , sometimes by popular custom and sometimes by official statements of the church .
saints are not believed to have power of their own , but only that granted by god .
relics of saints are respected , or venerated , similar to the veneration of holy images and icons .
the practice in past centuries of venerating relics of saints with the intention of obtaining healing from god through their intercession is taken from the early church .
the deacon , jack sullivan , said that after addressing newman he was cured of spinal stenosis in a matter of hours .
in 2009 , a panel of theologians concluded that sullivan 's recovery was the result of his prayer to newman .
according to the church , to be considered a miracle , " a medical recovery must be instantaneous , not attributable to treatment , disappear for good " .
once a person has been declared a saint , the body of the saint is considered holy .
some of the saints have a symbol of tradition , e . g . , saint lawrence , deacon and martyr .
this symbol is found in the canadian heraldry of the office responsible for the st . lawrence seaway .
the first step in this process is to look for the candidate 's life .
after this , the official report on the candidate is given to the bishop of the pertinent diocese and more study is undertaken .
the information is then sent to the congregation for the causes of saints of the holy see for evaluation at the universal level of the church .
further investigations may lead to the candidate 's beatification with the title " blessed " , which is elevation to the class of the " beati " .
after all of these procedures are complete , the pope may be canonized as a saint for veneration by the universal church .
in the eastern orthodox church , a saint is a person who is in heaven .
adam and eve , moses , the various prophets , except for the angels and archangels are all given the title of " saint " .
sainthood in the orthodox church does not always reflect a moral model , but the communion with god : there are countless examples of people who lived in great sin and became saints by humility and repentance , such as mary of egypt , moses the ethiopian , and dysmas , the repentant thief who was crucified .
saints are usually recognized by a local community , often by people who knew them .
canonization means that a christian has been found worthy to have his name placed in the canonstered official list lists of saints of the church .
this is followed by a service of glorification in which the saint is given a day on the church calendar to be celebrated by the entire church .
as a general rule only clergy will touch relics in order to move them or carry them in procession , however , in veneration the faithful will kiss the relics to show love and respect toward the saint .
when an orthodox christian venerates an icons of a saint he is venerating the image of god which he sees in the saint .
they are believed to be able to be salvation and help mankind either through direct communion with god , or by personal intervention .
this is a title attributed to saints who had lived a monastic or eremitic life .
the coptic orthodox church of alexandria , for example , has the requirement that at least 50 years must pass following a saint 's death before the coptic orthodox church 's pope can canonize the saint .
in the anglican communion and the continuing anglican movement , the title of saint refers to a person who has been elevated by popular opinion as a pious and holy person .
the saints are seen as models of holiness to be imitated , and as a ' cloud of witnesses ' that strengthen and encourage the believer during his or her spiritual journey .
in this belief , a saint is not merely a believer , but one who has been transformed by virtue .
the veneration of saints is sometimes misunderstood to be worship .
so far as invocation of the saints is concerned , one of the church of england 's articles of religion " of purgatory " condemns " the romish doctrine concerning .
indeed , the theologian e . j . bicknell , stated that the anglican view acknowledges that the term " invocation may mean either of two things : the simple request to a saint for his prayers forwards , ' ora pro nobis , ' or a request for some benefit .
in medieval times the saints had come to be regarded as the authors of blessings .
unusual examples of it are found in the korean liturgy 1938 , the liturgy of the diocese of guiana 1959 and the melanesian english prayer book .
anglicans believe that the only effective messiah to be killed by god the father , in terms of redemption and salvation , is god the son , jesus christ .
there are some groups who do not accept the idea of the saints .
the church still recognizes and honors specific saints , including some of those recognized by the catholic church , but in a qualified way : the term " saint " is used in the manner of the catholic church only insofar as to denote a person who received exceptional grace , was sustained by faith , and whose good works are an example to be an example to be an example to be an example to be an example .
traditional lutheran beliefs say prayers " to the saints are prohibited , as they are not mediators of redemption .
but , lutherans do believe that saints pray for the christian church in general .
this criticism was refuteed by the catholic side in the " confutatio augustana " , which in turn was refuted by the lutheran side in the " apology to the augsburg confession " .
while methodists as a whole do not venerate saints , they do honor and admire them .
methodists believe that all christians are saints , but mainly use the term to refer to biblical leaders , christian leaders , and martyrs of the faith .
many methodist churches are named after saints , such as the twelve apostles , john wesley , etc .
many encourage the study of saints , that is , the biography of holy people .
in many protestant churches , the word " saint " is used more generally to refer to anyone who is a christian .
this is similar to paul 's numerous references in the new testament of the bible .
in this sense , anyone who is within the body of christliness i . e . , a professing christian ण is a ' saint ' because of their relationship with christ jesus .
many protestant sects also consider the practice to be similar to necromancy as the dead are believed to be awaiting resurrection , unable to do anything for the living saint .
many emphasize the traditional new testament meaning of the word , preferring to write " saint " to refer to any believer , in continuity with the doctrine of the priesthood of all believers .
the beliefs within the church of jesus christ of latter-day saints saints saints soyuz with regard to saints are similar but not quite the same as the protestant tradition .
the qualification " latter-day " refers to the doctrine that members are living in the " latter days " , before the second coming of christ .
in english , the term saint is often used to translate the idea from many world religions .
cuban santeria , haitian vodou , trinidad orisha-shango , brazilian umbanda , candomble , and other similar syncretismismism groups adopted the catholic saints , or at least the images of the saints , and applied their own spirits / deities to them .
the name " santeria " was originally a negative term for those whose worship of saints deviated from catholic norms .
buddhists hold the arhats in special esteem , as well as bodhisattvas , other buddhas , or eminent members of the " sangha " .
hindu saints are those recognized by hindus as showing a great degree of holiness and sanctity .
in hinduism , many men and women have reached the status of saints among their followers .
the classical scholars came to recognize and honor these individuals as venerable people who were both " loved by god and developed a close relationship of love to him . "
the quran has pointed to it in different places .
the vast majority of saints venerated in the classical sunni world were the sufis , who were all sunni mystics who belonged to one of the four orthodox legal schools of sunni law .
the traditional practices which salafism has tried to curtail in both sunni and shia contexts include those of the veneration of saints , visiting their graves , seeking their intercession , and honoring their relics .
in hasidic judaism , the institution of the tzadik assumed central importance .
the term " sant " is used in the sikh and related communities to beings that have attained enlightenment through god realization and spiritual union with god repeatedly reciting the name of godciful naam japosons .
sikhs are encouraged to follow the congregation of a santhosh sangat foley or " the company of the holy " .
"
sants " grace the sadh sangat with knowledge of the divine god , and how to take greater steps towards obtaining spiritual enlightenment through " naam " .