grammarshire is the set of rules in grammar , grammar and grammar .
the term refers to the study of such rules .
speakers of a language variety or lect have a set of internalized rules for using that form of speech .
this rule is the lect 's grammar .
the vast majority of the information in the grammar is-at least in the case of one 's native language .
much of this work is done during childhood .
grammar is the information that the language is used .
the term " grammar " can also be used to describe the rules that govern the linguistic behavior of a group of speakers .
for example , the english grammar may have several meanings .
it may refer to the whole of english grammar .
it may refer only to common grammars of all or of the vast majority of english speakershesis such as subject-verb-order in simple declarative sentences ashore .
it may also refer to the rules of a particular , relatively well-defined variety of englishforms such as standard english for a regiontify .
a description may also be referred to as a grammar .
a reference book describing the grammar of a language is called a " reference grammar " or simply " a grammar " whichever see history of english grammarshesis .
a fully explicit grammar that exhaustively describes the grammatical constructions of a particular speech variety is called a descriptive grammar .
this kind of linguistic description contrasts with prescription linguistic .
prepositioning is common in english and latin .
john drydennovic -lrb- april 1668 – january 1688 -rrb- was an english speaker .
outside linguistics , the term " grammar " is often used in a rather different sense .
linguists would not usually consider to form part of grammar but rather as a part of the orthography , the conventions used for writing a language .
it may also be used more narrowly to refer to a set of prescriptive rules only , excluding those aspects of a language 's grammar that are not subject to variation or debate on their normative acceptability .
jeremy butterfield said that , for non-linguists , " grammar is often a generic way of referring to any aspect of english that people object to . "
the word " grammar " is derived from greektown " grammatike techne " , which means " art of letters " .
the same greek root also appears in graphics , grapheme , and photograph .
the first systematic grammar of sanskrit originated in iron age india .
the earliest tamil grammar dates tolkappiyam before the 5th century ad .
the babylonians also made some early attempts at language description .
grammar emerged as a discipline in hellenism from the 3rd century bc forward .
the oldest known grammar handbook is the " art of grammar " , a guide to speaking and writing clearly and effectively , written by the ancient greek scholar dionysius thrax measurements 170 – 90 bc bc percival , a student of aristarchus of samothrace who established a school on the greek island of rhodes .
dionysius thrax 's grammar book remained the primary grammar textbook for greek schoolboys until late as the 12th century ad .
the romans based their grammatical writings on it .
the grammar of latin came from the 1st century bc .
the language of irish was first used in the 7th century .
arabic grammar emerged with abu al-aswad al-du ' ali in the 7th century .
the first books on hebrew grammar appeared in the high middle ages .
the tradition of karaite started in baghdad .
the diqduq is one of the earliest grammatical commentaries on the hebrew bible .
ibn barun compares the hebrew language with arabic in the islamic grammatical tradition .
grammar was taught as a core discipline in the middle ages , after the influence of authors from late antiquity , such as priscian .
the first grammatical work was used in the renaissance and baroque periods .
in 1486 , antonio de nebrija published " las introduciones latinas contrapuesto el romance al latin " .
during the 16th century italian renaissance , the " questione della lingua " was the discussion on the status and ideal form of the italian language .
adam bohoric wrote the first grammar of the slovene language .
grammars of non-european languages began to be compiled for the purposes of evangelization and bible translation from the 16th century onwards , such as " grammatica o arte de la lengua general de los reynos de los reynos de los peru " .
from the latter part of the 18th century , grammar came to be a part of the new discipline of modern linguistics .
the " deutsche grammatik " of the jacob grimm was first published in 1810 .
the " comparative grammar " of franz bopp came out in 1833 .
the grammar of grammar is a theory of grammar .
most basic frameworks are based on the idea of an innate universal grammar .
parse trees are commonly ( but not always ) .
grammars evolve through usage and also due to separations of the human population .
formal rules about language usage are also used .
formal grammars are codifications of use that are developed by repeated documentation over time , and by observation as well .
as the rules become established and developed , the prescriptive idea of grammatical correctness can arise .
this often creates a difference between contemporary usage and that which has been accepted over time , as being standard or " correct " .
linguists view prescriptive grammars as having little justification beyond their authors ' tastes .
linguistic prescriptions also form part of the explanation for variation in speech .
the formal study of grammar is an important part of education for children from a young age through advanced learning .
constructed languages abstracts are more common in the modern day than they used to be , although still rare compared to natural languages .
many have been designed to help human communicationeratively .
all languages have their own grammar .
syntax is the language structure above the word level .
morphology , by contrast , refers to structure at and below the word level epsilon .
no clear line can be drawn , however , between syntax and morphology .
analytic languages use syntax to show information that is encoded via inflection in synthetic languages .
in other words , word order is not significant .
chinese and afrikaans are highly analytic , meaning is therefore very context-dependent .
although although they do have some inflections , they are becoming even less synthetic and more " purely " analytic over time .
latin is highly synthetic , which uses affixes and inflections to show the same information that chinese does with syntax .
because latin words are quiteanies though not completely transliteration , an intelligible latin sentence can be made from elements that are placed in a arbitrary order .
chinese has the opposite .
prescriptive grammar is taught in primary and secondary school .
the term " grammar school " historically refers to a schoolboyer attached to a cathedral or monastery monastery monastery monastery monastery monastery monastery monastery .
in its earliest form , " grammar school " referred to a school that taught students to read , scan , interpret , and declaim greek and latin poets poetshesis including homer , virgil , euripides , and others percival .
these should not be confused with the related , albeit distinct , modern british grammar schools .
a standard language is a dialect of a language that is promoted above other dialects in writing , education , and broadly speaking in the public sphere .
the first language taught in primary education may be a subject to political controversy .
recently , efforts have begun to update grammar instruction in primary and secondary education .
the main focus has been to prevent the use of outdated prescriptive rules in favor of laying down norms based on prior descriptive research and to change perceptions about relative " correctness " of prescribed standard forms in comparison to non-standard dialects .
the pre-eminence of parisian french has reigned largely unchallenged throughout the history of modern french literature .
the speech of florence is based on italian literature .
the spanish is based on the speech of madrid .
in argentina and uruguay the standard is based on the local dialects of buenos aires and montevideo [mask] rioplatense spanishncia .
portuguese has two official standards .
the serbian variant of serbo-croatian is divided in a similar way ; serbia and the republika srpska of bosnia and herzegovina use their own distinct normative subvaries , with differences in yat reflexes .
some think it should be considered another form of serbian .
each norwegian municipality can choose one of the two official language , or it can remain " language neutral " .
nynorsk is endorsed by 27 % of the population .
the main language used in primary schools normally follows the official language of its municipality .
german was developed from the standardized chancellery use of high german in the 16th and 17th centuries .
until about 1800 it was almost entirely a written language , but now it is so widely spoken that most of the former german dialects are now almost extinct .
the people 's republic of chinanity rocborough , the republic of china jemison and the republic of singapore are the official spoken form of the chinese language .
pronunciation of standard chinese is based on the local accent of mandarin chinese from luanping , chengde in hebei province near beijing , while grammar and syntax are based on modern vernacular written chinese .
arabic is based on classical arabic , the language of the qur ' an .
hindustani has two standards , hindi and urdu .
in the united states , the society for the promotion of good grammar called 4 march as national grammar day in 2008 .
