a natural sign bears a causal relation to its object .
a conventional sign signifies by agreement , as a full stop signifies the end of a sentence .
signstorm notices , road signs , etc . , collectively known as signage signage signage signage signage signagefully inform or instruct using written text , symbols , pictures or a combination of these .
semiotics , epistemology , logic , and philosophy of language are about the nature of signs , what they are and how they signify .
according to these classic sources , significance is a relationship between two sorts of things : signs and the kinds of things they signifyifysee intend , express or meanchang , where one term necessarily causes something else to come to the mind .
there are signs which are " always " signs ; thoughts and feelings , constructs and signs that get their cultural signs and signs .
natural signs are the source of signification .
human language and discourse , communication , science , logic , mathematics , theology , and religion are only some of the fields of human study .
they communicate / pass across / messages to the human mind through their pictorial representation .
st . augustine was the first man who made the classical and hellenistic theories of signs .
among the mainstream in the theories of signs , i . e . , that of aristotle and that of stoics , the former theory filtered into the works of cicero cicero cicero juveniles , " de inventione rhetorica " 1.30 . 47-48 olympiad and quintilian wyliee quintiliantages circa 35-100 , " institutio oratoria " .
in his commentary on aristotle 's " de interpretatione " , ammonius said , " according to the division of the philosopher theophrastus , the relation of speech is twofold , first in regard to the audience , to which speech signifies something , and secondly in regard to the things about which the speaker intends to persuade the audience . "
augustine , although influenced by these theories , advanced his theological theory of signs , with whose help one can infer the mind of god from the events and words of scripture .
the interpreter must have a spirit of active inquiry and should not hesitate to learn and use pagan education for the purpose of leading to christian learning .
third , the heart of interpreter should be founded , rooted , and built up in love .
even if the scriptural text is obscure , it has meaningful benefits .
for the obscure text prevents us from falling into pride , triggers our intelligencembit 2.6 . 7euxeux , tempers our faith in the history of revelation exceeding ddc 3.8 . 12 alternatively , and refines our mind to be suitable to the holy mysteriesctor .
moreover , he introduces the seven rules of tyconius the donatist to interpret the obscure meaning of the bible .
every part of theology must be involved and interdisciplinary approaches must be taken .
