the stories are woven together by a framing narrative .
the stories can be read separately , but they share a theme of the interaction of humans , robots , and morality .
when asimov published his book , he wrote a framing sequence about her life 's work .
the book also contains the short story in which asimov 's three laws of robotics first appeared .
other characters that appear in these short stories are powell and donovan .
the collection shares a title with the 1939 short story " i , robot " by eando binder dq pseudonym of earl and otto binderhausen , which greatly influenced asimov .
asimov wanted to call his collection " mind and iron " .
" the new york times " described " i , robot " as " an exciting science thriller which could be fun for those whose nerves are not already made raw by the potentialities of the atomic age . "
the 12th episode of the ussr science fiction tv series " this fantastic world " was filmed in 1987 and entitled " don ' t joke with robots " .
both of the original and revival series of " the outer limits " include episodes named " i , robot " ; however , both are adaptations of the earl and otto binder story of that name and are unconnected with asimov 's work .
in the late 1970s , warner bros . decided to make a movie based on the book , but no screenplay was ever accepted .
ellison worked with asimov himself to create a version which captured the spirit of the original .
asimov is quoted as saying that this screenplay would lead to " the first really adult , complex , worthwhile science fiction movie ever made . "
ellison placed calvin into stories in which she did not originally appear and fleshed out her character 's role in places where she did .
ellison used the movie " citizen kane " as a model .
asimov also believed that the movie may have been scrapped because of a conflict between ellison and the producers .
the script was serialized in " asimov 's science fiction " magazine in late 1987 .
it was released on july 16,2004 .
the story of the story is about some of asimov 's character names and the " three laws " .
however , the plot of the movie is mostly original work adapted from the screenplay " hardwired " by jeff vintar .
in 2004 , " the saturday evening post " said that " i , robot " 's three laws " revolutionized the science fiction genre and made robots far more interesting than they ever had been before . "
the name of the real-life modem manufacturer named u . s . robotics was inspired by " i , robot " .
the name is taken from the name of a robot manufacturerhesis " united states robots and mechanical men " .
it depicts a planet of androids in the need of humans .
another reference appears in the title of a " " episode , " i , borg " egyptardardardardardardardardy , in which geordi la forge befriends a lost member of the borg collective .
in " aliens " , a 1986 movie , the synthetic person bishop paraphrases asimov 's first law in the line : " it is impossible for me to harm , or by omission of action allow to be harmed , a human being . "
leela once told bender to " cover his ears " so that he would not hear the robot-destroying paradox which she used to destroy robot santa clara clara .
the positronic brain , which asimov named his robots ' central processors , is what powers data from " star trek : the next generation " , as well as other soong type androids .
positronic brains have been referenced in a number of other television shows including " doctor who " , " once upon a time . space " , " perry rhodan " , " the number of the beast " , and others .
he also said , " if i return to this theme , it will be with a story about uplifted cheese sandwiches , called ' i , rarebit . '
the album was going to be a success on the short story collection .
the alan parsons project were not able to get the rights in spite of asimov 's enthusiasm ; he had already assigned the rights elsewhere .
the 2002 electronica album by experimental artist edman goodrichrichtage known , at times , to operate under the aliases of " je , le roi ! "
and " the ghost quartet " shares the title of " i , robot " .
when a scientist takes in the robot for evaluation , the panel asks whether the robot was built using the three laws of robotics .
