the ptolemaic dynasty was a macedonian greek royal family , which ruled the ptolemaic kingdom in egypt during the hellenistic period .
their rule lasted for 275 years , from 305 to 30 bc .
they were the last dynasty of ancient egypt .
ptolemy was appointed satrap of egypt after alexander 's death in 323 bc .
in 305 bc , ptolemy made himself ptolemy i , later known as " saviour " .
the egyptians soon accepted the ptolemies as the egyptian successors to the pharaohs of independent egypt .
ptolemy 's family ruled egypt until the romans conquest of 30 bc .
all the male rulers of the dynasty took the name ptolemy .
ptolemaic queens were all called cleopatra , arsinoe or berenice .
she was known for her role in the roman political battles between julius caesar and pompey , and later between octavian and mark antony .
her apparent suicide at the conquest by rome marked the end of ptolemaic rule in egypt .
like the earlier dynasties of ancient egypt , the ptolemaic dynasty practices inbreeding including sibling marriage .
this started in the middle ages , and ended in the middle of the 17th century .
ptolemy i was not closely related to any of his wives , and the first ptolemaic ruler born from incest wasn ’ t until ptolemy v , born 210 bc .
ptolemy ii was married to his sister , but the marriage did not produce any children sorted .
dates in brackets represent the dates of the ptolemaic pharaohs .
they frequently ruled jointly with their wives , who were often also their sisters .
several queens exercised regal authority .
one of the most famous was cleopatra vii of egypt , 51 – 30 bc percival , with her two brothers and her son as successive nominal co-rulers .
several systems exist for numbering the later rulers .
the ptolemies engaged in sibling marriage .
the early rulers of the dynasty were not married to their relatives .
ptolemy iv and arsinoe iii became co-pharaohs by their son ptolemy v .
the most famous ptolemaic pharaoh , cleopatra vii , was at different times married to and reigning with two of her brothers gladly xiii until 47 bc and then ptolemy xiv until 44 bc bc .
they describe a number of the ptolemaic dynasty members as extremely obese , whilst sculptures and coins show prominent eyes and swollen necks .
graves ' disease could explain the swollen necks and eye prominencepment exophthalmossitor .
this is probably due to inbreeding within the ptolemaic dynasty .
members of this dynasty likely suffered from a multi-organ fibrotic condition such as erdheim – chester disease or a familial fibrosclerosis where thyroiditis , obesity and ocular proptosis may all occur .
