kansas is a state in the united states .
its capital is topeka and the largest city is wichita .
kansas is bordered by nebraska on the north ; oklahoma on the south ; and colorado on the west .
kansas is named after the kansas river .
the tribe 's name appears natively " " .
for thousands of years , what is now kansas was home to many native american tribes .
tribes in the eastern part of the state generally lived in villages along the river valleys .
tribes in the western part of the state were semi-nomadic and hunted large herds of bison .
kansas was first settled by americans in 1827 .
the pace of settlement grew quickly in the 1850s .
when it was officially opened to settlement by the u . s . government in 1854 with the kansas – nebraska act , abolitionist free-staters from new england and pro-slavery settlers from neighboring missouri rushed to the territory to determine whether kansas would become a free state or a slave state .
thus , the area was a hotbed of violence and chaos in its early days as these forces collided , and was known as bleeding kansas .
on january 29,1861 , kansas entered the union as a free state .
by 2015 , kansas was one of the most productive agricultural states .
kansas is the 34th-largest state in the united states .
people who live in kansas are called " kansans " .
mount sunflower is 4,039 ft high .
for a millennium , the land that is currently kansas was inhabited by native americans .
the first european to set foot in present-day kansas was the spanish conquistador francisco vazquez de coronado , who explored the area in 1541 .
in 1803 , most of modern kansas was bought by the united states as part of the louisiana purchase .
southwest kansas was a part of spain , mexico , and the republic of texas until the end of the mexican – american war in 1848 .
from 1812 to 1821 , kansas was part of the missouri territory .
the santa fe trail went through kansas from 1821 to 1880 .
wagon ruts from the trail are still seen in the prairie today .
fort leavenworth was the first permanent white settlement in the future .
on may 30,1854 , the kansas-nebraska act became law .
kansas territory stretched all the way to the continental divide and included the sites of present-day denver , colorado springs , and pueblo .
missouri and arkansas sent settlers into kansas all along its eastern border .
these settlers attempted to sway votes in favor of slavery .
they tried to stop slavery from neighboring missouri .
these forces collided , entering into skirmishes that earned the name of bleeding kansas .
kansas became a free state on january 29,1861 .
by that time the violence in kansas had largely stopped , but during the civil war , on august 21,1863 , william quantrill led several hundred men on a raid into lawrence , destroying much of the city and killing nearly 200 people .
he was sentenced to death by both the conventional confederate military and the partisan rangers commissioned by the missouri legislature .
his application to that body for a commission was rejected due to his pre-war criminal record .
after the civil war , many people built homesteads in kansas .
many african americans also looked to kansas as the land of " john brown " .
they left southern states in the late 1870s because of increasing discrimination .
the chisholm trail was opened and the wild west-era started in kansas .
he was a marshal at fort riley and a marshal at hays and abilene .
dodge city was another wild cowboy town .
this earned dodge the nickname " queen of the cowtowns . "
in response to demands of methodists and other evangelical protestants , in 1881 kansas became the first u . s . state to adopt a constitutional amendment which was repealed in 1948 .
kansas is bordered by nebraska on the north ; oklahoma on the south ; and colorado on the west .
the state is divided into 105 counties .
the geographic center of the 48 contiguous states is in smith county near lebanon .
until 1989 , the meades ranch triangulation station in osborne county was the geodetic center of north america .
the geographic center of kansas is in barton county .
kansas has a sequence of horizontal to gently westward dipping sedimentary rocks .
a sequence of mississippian , pennsylvanian and permian rocks outcrop in the eastern and southern part of the state .
the state 's western half has exposures of cretaceous through tertiary sediments .
these are underlain by older paleozoic and mesozoic sediments which correlate well with the outcrops to the east .
the state 's northeastern corner was subjected to glaciation in the pleistocene .
the western two-thirds of the state , lying in the great central plain of the united states , has a generally flat surface , while the eastern third has many hills and forests .
the land gradually rises from east to west .
it is a common misconception that kansas is the flattest state in the nation .
kansas has a maximum topographic relief of 3360 ft . this makes it the 23rd flattest u . s . state of kansas by maximum relief .
nearly 75 mi of the state 's northeastern border is defined by the missouri river .
it goes 170 mi across the northeastern part of the state .
the arkansas river severn pronunciation varies greatly , rising in colorado , flows with a bending course for nearly 500 mi across the western and southern parts of the state .
it forms the southern drainage system of the state .
other rivers in the state are the saline and solomon rivers , tributaries of the smoky hill river , the big blue , delaware , and wakarusa , which flow into the kansas river .
spring river is between riverton and baxter springs .
according to the koppen climate classification , kansas 's climate has three types : it has humid continental , semi-arid steppe , and humid subtropical .
the eastern two-thirds of the state region is humid continental climate .
most of the precipitation falls during both the summer and the spring .
the western third of the state – from roughly the u . s . route 83 corridor westward – has a semiarid steppe climate .
summers are hot , often very hot , and generally less humid .
winters can be between warm and very cold .
the western region gets an average of about 16 inches of precipitation per year .
chinook winds in the winter can warm western kansas all the way into the 80 dalai range .
the far south-central and southeastern parts of kansas , including the wichita area , have a humid subtropical climate with hot and humid summers , milder winters , and more precipitation than elsewhere in kansas .
places can get both warm and cold in the winter .
temperatures in areas between u . s . routes 83 and 81 , as well as the southwestern portion of the state along and south of u . s . 50 , reach 90 ° or above on most days of june , july , and august .
high humidity added to the high temperatures to the high temperatures , and sends the heat index into life-threatening territory , especially in wichita , hutchinson , salina , russell , hays , and great bend .
temperatures are often higher than the actual air temperature .
temperatures of 100 horsepower or higher are not as common in some parts of the u . s . 81 , higher humidity and the urban heat island effect lead most summer days to heat indices between 107 ° and 114 ° in topeka , lawrence , and the kansas city metropolitan area .
during the summer , the low temperatures in the northeastern part of the state struggle to fall below 80 ° c .
also , with humidity between 85 and 95 percent , dangerous heat can be experienced at every hour of the day .
it is about 16 inches in the southwest .
snowfall ranges from around 5 inches in the south , to 35 inches in the far northwest .
frost-free days range from more than 200 days in the south , to 130 days in the northwest .
kansas is the country 's ninth or tenth sunniest state .
western kansas is as sunny as california and arizona .
kansas is prone to severe weather , especially in the spring and the early summer .
despite the frequent sunshine throughout much of the state , the state is vulnerable to strong and severe thunderstorms .
some of these storms become supercell thunderstorms .
kansas has over 50 tornadoes every year .
severe thunderstorms sometimes drop some very large hail over kansas as well .
these storms can even cause flash flooding and damaging straight line winds .
the all-time low is-40 happening happening on february 13,1905 , near lebanon in smith county .
alton and lebanon are about 50 mi apart .
kansas 's record high of 121 ° c is 121 ° c -lrb- 56 ° f -rrb- with north dakota for the fifth-highest record high in an american state .
the population of kansas was 2,911 , 505 on july 1,2018 .
this includes a natural increase since the last census of 93,899 people lived there .
immigration from outside the united states resulted in a net increase of 44,847 people , and migration within the country produced a net loss of 65,589 people .
the population density of kansas is 52.9 people per square mile .
the center of population of kansas is in chase county .
the focus on labor-efficient grain-based agriculture -lrb- such as large wheat farm that requires only one or a few people with large farm machinery to operate , rather than a vegetable farm that requires many people during planting and harvest .
ethnically 10.5 % of the total population is of hispanic or latino origin .
as of 2004,149 , 800 people lived there .
the ten largest reported ancestry groups are : germanhunter 33.75 % ; irish ; irish ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ;
german descendants are especially present in the northwest .
mexicans are present in the southwest and make up nearly half the population in certain counties .
many black people in kansas were from the exodusters , newly freed black black people who left the south for land in kansas after the civil war .
35.0 % of kansas 's population younger than one year old were part of minority groups greenberg .
english is the most spoken language in kansas .
spanish is second .
as of 2010 , the association of religion data archives shouldn arda aarhus reported that the catholic church has the highest number of followers in kansasborough at 426,611 .
it was the site of charles fox parham 's bethel bible college .
it is also the home of reverend charles sheldon , author of " in his steps " , and was the site where the question " what would jesus do ? "
it was started in a sermon of sheldon 's at central congregational church .
topeka is also home of the westboro baptist church .
the church has received worldwide attention for picketing the funerals of u . s . servicemen and women for what church members say as " necessary to combat the fight for equality for gays and lesbians . "
they have sometimes successfully raised lawsuits against the city of topeka .
the last few decades have been marked by a migratory pattern out of the countryside into cities .
out of all the cities in these midwestern states , 89 % have fewer than 3,000 people , and hundreds of those have fewer than 1,000 .
in kansas alone , there are more than 6,000 ghost towns and dwindling communities .
some of the communities in johnson countyailing metropolitan kansas city coptic coptic are among the fastest growing in the country .
kansas has 627 cities .
cities are divided into three categories .
cities reaching a population of more than 2,000 may be certified as a city of the second class .
cities with less than 25,000 people can be considered a city of the first class .
first and second class cities are independent of any township and are not included within the township 's territory .
" note : births in table don ’ t add up , because hispanics are counted both by their race and by their race , giving a higher overall number . "
the northeastern portion of the state is home to more than 1.5 million people in the kansas cityoop .
overland park is the biggest city in the county .
johnson county community college is there .
in 2006 , the city was ranked as the sixth best place to live in america .
olathe is the county seat of johnson county .
olathe , shawnee , de soto and gardner are some of the fastest growing cities in the united states .
the cities of overland park , lenexa , olathe , de soto , and gardner are also notable because they are along the former route of the santa fe trail .
mission hills has the highest median income in the state .
several schools of higher education are located in northeast kansas .
lawrence haskell indian nations university .
to the north , kansas city , with the second largest land area in the state , has a number of diverse ethnic neighborhoods .
it is also famous for the kansas speedway , sporting kansas city , kansas city t-bones , schlitterbahn , and the legends at village west retail and entertainment center .
nearby , kansas 's first settlement bonner springs is home to several national and regional attractions including the providence medical center amphitheather , the national agricultural center and hall of fame , and the annual kansas city renaissance festival .
further up the missouri river , the city of lansing is the home of the state 's first maximum-security prison .
it was the first city in kansas .
fort leavenworth is the oldest active army post west of the mississippi river .
the city of atchison was an early commercial center in the state .
to the west , nearly a quarter million people live in topeka .
washburn university and washburn institute of technology are in topeka .
it is built at a kansas river crossing along the old oregon trail .
further westward along interstate 70 and the kansas river is junction city with its historic limestone and brick buildings and fort riley , well known as the home to the u . s . army 's 1st infantry division nicknamed " the big red one " buddhism .
kansas state university is in manhattan .
aggieville is the state 's oldest shopping district .
in south-central kansas , the wichita metropolitan area has over 600,000 people .
wichita is the largest city in the state .
' the air capital ' is a major manufacturing area for the aircraft industry .
before wichita was ' the air capital ' it was a cowtown .
it has a desire to become a cultural mecca in the midwest .
wichita 's population growth has grown by double digits .
the population of goddard has grown by more than 11 % per year since 2000 .
other fast growing cities include andover , maize , park city , derby , and haysville .
wichita was one of the first cities to add the city commissioner and city manager in their form of government .
wichita is also home of the nationally recognized sedgwick county zoo .
up riveroux the arkansas river enters wichita .
it is the largest and longest wheat elevator in the world .
it is also the home of kansas cosmosphere and space center , prairie dunes country club and the kansas state fair .
north of wichita along interstate 135 is the city of newton .
to the southeast of wichita are the cities of winfield and arkansas city with historic architecture and the cherokee strip museum bethel in ark city lilith .
it killed 80 people in and near the city .
to the southwest of wichita is freeport .
it is midway between kansas city , topeka , and wichita .
it was home to newspaper man william allen white .
southeast kansas has a unique history .
pittsburg is the biggest city in the region .
frontenac in 1888 was the site of the worst mine disaster in kansas .
" big brutus " is about 1.5 mi outside the city of west mineral .
fort scott has a national cemetery .
salina is the biggest city in central and north-central kansas .
lindsborg has many dala horses .
much of the architecture and decor of this town is a distinctly swedish style .
it is the site of his presidential library and the tombs of the former president , first lady and son who died in infancy .
to the west is lucas , the grassroots art capital of kansas .
westward along the interstate , the city of russell was the base of former u . s . senator bob dole .
it is also the biggest city in the northwest .
the " cathedral of the plains " is 10 mi east of hays in victoria .
west of hays , population drops dramatically , even in areas along i-70 , and only two towns with populations of more than 4,000 : colby and goodland , which are 35 mi apart along i-70 .
dodge city was famous for the cattle drives that started in the late 19th century .
liberal is along the southern santa fe trail route .
the first wind farm in the state was built east of montezuma .
garden city has the lee richardson zoo .
in 1992 , a secessionist movement wanted to split several counties in southwest kansas .
the bureau of economic analysis estimates that kansas 's total gross domestic product in 2014 was us $ billion .
in 2015 , the job growth rate in was . 8 % .
the kansas department of labor gave the average annual wage to $ 42,930 in 2015 .
as of april 2016 , the state 's unemployment rate is 4.2 % .
kansas had a $ 350 million budget shortfall in february 2017 .
in february 2017 , s & p downgraded kansas 's credit rating to aa-.
about 90 % of kansas 's land is used for agriculture .
the state 's agricultural outputs are cattle , sheep , wheat , sorghum , soybeans , cotton , hogs , corn , and salt .
as of 2011 , there were 59,600 farms in kansas , 86ª 0.14 % segments of which are certified organic farms .
the average farm in the state is about 770 acres .
the main crop grown in kansas is wheat .
eastern kansas is part of the grain belt .
about 40 % of all winter wheat grown in the us is grown in kansas .
about 95 % of the wheat grown in the state is wheat wheat .
during 2016 , farmers of conventionally grown wheat farmed 8.2 million acres and harvested an average of 57 bushels of wheat per acre .
the industries are transportation equipment , commercial and private aircraft , food processing , publishing , chemical products , machinery , apparel , petroleum , and mining .
kansas is ranked 8th in us petroleum production .
production has experienced a steady , natural decline as it becomes increasingly difficult to extract oil over time .
since oil prices bottomed in 1999 , oil production in kansas has remained fairly constant , with an average monthly rate of about 2.8 moilbbl in 2004 .
the recent higher prices have made carbon dioxide sequestration and other oil recovery techniques more economical .
kansas is also ranked eighth in us natural gas production .
production has steadily decreased since the mid-1990s with the gradual depletion of the hugoton natural gas field – the state 's largest field which extends into oklahoma and texas .
in 2004 , slower declines in the hugoton gas fields and increased coalbed methane production made smaller overall decline .
average monthly production is over 32 e9cuft .
the state 's economy is heavily influenced by the aerospace industry .
several large aircraft corporations have manufacturing facilities in wichita and kansas city .
boeing stopped making it in 2013 .
major companies headquartered in kansas include the sprint corporation enoch with world headquarters in overland parkdilly , yrc worldwide ɔ overland parkored overland parkliness , garminciful olathedilly , payless shoes waived , and kocharians with national headquarters in wichitapanpan .
embarq used to be the national headquarters in overland park before its acquisition by centurytel in 2009 .
kansas is also home to three major military bases : fort leavenworth quiver army ) , fort rileyailing army ) , and mcconnell air force base pendleton .
approximately 25,000 active duty soldiers and airmen are stationed at these bases .
the us army reserve also has the 451st expeditionary sustainment command .
the kansas air national guard has units at forbes field in topeka and the 184th intelligence wing in wichita .
the smoky hill weapons range is one of the largest and busiest bombing ranges in the nation .
during wwii , kansas had many army air corps training fields for training new pilots and aircrew .
many of those airfields are in today as municipal airports .
revenue shortfalls result from lower than expected tax collections and slower growth in personal income after a 1998 permanent tax reduction have contributed to the substantial growth in the state 's debt level as bonded debt increased from $ 1.16 billion in 1998 to $ 3.83 billion in 2006 .
some money was expected as the state continues with its 10-year comprehensive transportation program enacted in 1999 .
in 2003 , kansas had three income brackets for income tax calculation .
the state sales tax in kansas is 6.15 % of the state 's sales .
various cities and counties in kansas have an additional local sales tax .
during the 2001 recession recession exceptionally , when monthly sales tax collections were flat , collections have trended higher as the economy has grown .
if there had been no change in sales tax rates or in the economy , the total sales tax collections for 2003 whould have been $ 1,797 million , compared to $ 805.3 million in 1990 .
however , they instead amounted to $ 1,630 million an inflation adjusted reduction of 10 % .
the state sales tax is a combined destination-based tax .
kansas has 920 separate sales tax rates .
this taxing scheme was adopted on october 1,2005 .
sales tax is subject to sales tax .
all sales tax collected is remitted to the state department of revenue .
in 2004 , moody 's investors service ranked the state 14th for net tax-supported debt per capita .
as a percentage of personal income , it was at 3.8 % .
however , lawmakers can vote to override the rule .
he was the democratic nominee for governor of kansas in the 2010 election .
in may 2012 , governor brownback signed the kansas senate bill substitute hb 2117 .
starting in 2013 , the " ambitious tax overhaul " trimmed income tax , eliminated some corporate taxes , and created pass-through income tax exemptions , he raised the sales tax by one percent to offset the loss to state revenues but that was not good enough .
he made cuts to education and some state services to pay lost money .
the tax cut led to years of budget shortfalls , culminating in a $ 350 million budget shortfall in february 2017 .
in 2013,300 , 000 businesses were considered to be pass-through income entities and benefited from the tax exemption .
the tax reform encouraged tens of thousands of kansans to claim their wages and salaries as income from a business rather than from employment .
the economy of brownback was not good .
he argued that it was because of " low wheat and oil prices and a downturn in aircraft sales " .
the state general fund debt load was $ 83 million in fiscal year 2010 .
in 2016 , brownback became the " most unpopular governor in america " .
only 26 percent of kansas voters approved his job performance , compared to 65 percent who said they did not .
in the summer of 2016 , the s & p global ratings downgraded kansas 's credit rating .
in february 2017 , s & p lowered it to aa-.
in february 2017 , a bi-partisan coalition presented a bill that would repeal the pass-through income exemption , the " most important provisions of brownback 's overhaul " , and raise taxes to make up for the budget shortfall .
brownback vetoed the bill but " 45 gop legislators had voted in favor of the increase , while 40 voted to uphold the governor 's veto . "
on june 6,2017 , a coalition of democrats and newly-elected republicans overrode brownback 's veto and implemented tax increases to a level that is close to what it was before 2013 .
brownback 's tax overhaul was described in june 2017 .
the very big tax cuts had " threatened the viability of schools and infrastructure " in kansas .
there are two interstate highways with one beltway , two spur routes , and three bypasses .
the first section of interstate in the nation was opened on interstate 70 couldn , i-70 breuning just west of topeka on november 14,1956 .
it goes from denver , colorado and kansas city , missouri .
cities along this route totaled from west to east include colby , hays , salina , junction city , topeka , lawrence , bonner springs , and kansas city .
it goes from oklahoma city , oklahoma and des moines , iowa .
cities along this route totaled from south to north lest include wichita , el dorado , emporia , ottawa , and kansas city ∅ .
spur routes serve as connect between the two major routes .
it goes from i-135 at salina .
i-335 , a southwest – northeast route , goes from interstate 35 at emporia to i-70 at topeka .
interstate 335 and parts of i-35 and i-70 make up the kansas turnpike .
it goes around topeka , i-235 around wichita , and i-670 in downtown kansas city .
i-435 is a beltway around the kansas city metropolitan area .
it goes from oklahoma to missouri .
it goes through baxter springs , pittsburg , frontenac , fort scott , louisburg , and the kansas city area .
kansas also has the country 's third largest state highway system after texas and california .
this is because of the high number of counties and county seats .
in january 2004 , the kansas department of transportationricted kdotdot announced the new kansas 511 traveler information service .
by dialing 511 , callers will get access to information about road conditions , construction , closures , detours and weather conditions for the state highway system .
weather and road condition information is updated every 15 minutes .
the state 's only major commercial carriers are wichita dwight d . eisenhower national airport .
manhattan regional airport in manhattan has flights to dallas / fort worth international airport and chicago 's o ' hare international airport .
most air travelers in northeastern kansas fly out of kansas city international airport .
tulsa international airport is an airport in tulsa , oklahoma .
for people in the far western part of the state , denver international airport is a popular option .
it can be used to get from other kansas airports in dodge city , hays , hutchinson , liberal , or salina .
it is the headquarters of " skydive kansas " , garden city regional airport , manhattan regional airport , and dodge city regional airport .
the " southwest chief " amtrak route goes through the state on its route from chicago to los angeles .
other important cities in kansas include lawrence , topeka , newton , hutchinson , dodge city , and garden city .
it goes through newton , kansas , oklahoma , and wichita .
amtrak is planning to change the southwest chief train from its status as a direct passenger rail operation .
it is going to los angeles to albuquerque .
buses would replace the train on the route between albuquerque and dodge city , where train service east to chicago would continue .
kansas has four class i railroads , amtrak , bnsf , kansas city southern , and union pacific .
executive branch : the executive branch is a branch of government , but there are five elected officers .
the lieutenant governor is elected by the lieutenant governor .
the attorney general , secretary of state , state treasurer , and state insurance commissioner are elected separately .
five of the top executive offices of kansas are republican .
on january 31,2018 , governor jeff colyer took office .
elected in 2010 were the attorney general derek schmidt of independence ; the secretary of state kris kobach , of kansas city ; the state treasurer jacob laturner , of galena ; and the insurance commissioner ken selzer , of topeka .
the legislative branch is made up of the kansas house of representatives , with 125 members serving two-year terms , and the kansas senate , with 40 members serving four-year terms .
currently , 31 of the 40 senators are republican .
judicial branch : the judicial branch is headed by the kansas supreme court .
the court has seven judges .
a vacancy is filled by the governor picking one of three nominees picked by the kansas supreme court nominating commission .
the board is made up of five kansas lawyers who are elected by other kansas lawyers .
since the middle of the 20th century , kansas has been socially conservative .
the 1990s brought the defeat of prominent democrats , including dan glickman , and the kansas state board of education 's 1999 decision to eliminate evolution from the state teaching standards , a decision that was later reversed .
in 2005 , the state of kansas voted to allow same-sex marriage .
the next year , the state passed a law setting a minimum age for marriage at 15 years .
kansas 's path to a solid republican state has been examined by historian thomas frank in his 2004 book " what 's the matter with kansas ? " .
kansas has a history of many firsts in legislative initiatives .
kansas also allowed women 's suffrage in 1912 .
in 1920 , the united states constitution made the 19th amendment to the united states constitution .
many cities were being run by political machines or organized crime .
in 1954 , the supreme court of kansas ruled that kansas was at the center of " brown v . board of education of topeka " .
the state backed republicans wendell willkie and thomas e . dewey in 1940 and 1944 .
kansas also supported dewey in 1948 .
only one democrat has won kansas 's electoral votes , lyndon b . johnson in 1964 .
in 2008 , governor kathleen sebelius vetoed permits for the construction of new coal-fired energy plants in kansas .
kansas is very near to it .
therefore , reducing pollutants benefits our state not only in the short term -lrb- but also for generations of kansans to come -rrb- .
parkinson announced that he would allow building of a coal-fired plant .
he was elected governor in 2010 .
he was sworn in as governor in 2011 .
brownback has established himself as a conservative member of the u . s . senate in years prior , but since becoming governor has made several controversial decisions , leading to a 23 % approval rating among registered voters , the lowest of any governor in the united states .
in may 2011 , much to the opposition of art leaders and fans in the state , brownback removed the kansas arts commission .
in july 2011 , brownback announced that he would close the lawrence branch of the kansas department of social and rehabilitation services as a cost-saving measure .
hundreds of people argued against the decision .
later , lawrence city commission later voted to provide the money needed to keep the branch open .
the state 's current delegation to the congress of the united states includes republican senators pat roberts of dodge city and jerry moran of manhattan ; and republican representatives roger marshall of great bendbled district 1isk , steve watkinsylus of wichita avail district 2 wickets , ron estes of wichita [ district 4 temeraire district 3 goethes , and democratic representative sharice davidshahs district 3 goethes district .
this is when the republican party was created out of the movement against slavery into kansas territory .
kansas has not elected a democrat to the u . s . senate since 1932 .
this is the longest senate losing streak for either party in a single state .
he ran for president in 2008 .
brownback was not a candidate for re-election to a third full term in 2010 , but he was elected governor in that year 's general election .
moran won a landslide general election in november 2010 .
the only non-republican presidential candidates kansas has given its electoral vote to are populist james weaver and democrats woodrow wilson , franklin roosevelt roosevelt roosevelt roosevelt roosevelt roosevelt roosevelt roosevelt roosevelt roosevelt roosevelt roosevelt roosevelt roosevelt roosevelt roosevelt roosevelt roosevelt roosevelt roosevelt roosevelt innings , and lyndon johnson .
george w . bush won the state 's six electoral votes by a majority of 25 percentage points with 62 % of the vote .
the only two counties to support democrat john kerry in that election were wyandotte , which contains kansas city , and douglas , home to the university of kansas , located in lawrence .
the 2008 election brought similar results as john mccain won the state with 57 % of the votes .
douglas , wyandotte , and crawford county were the only counties in support of president barack obama .
abilene was the boyhood home to republican president dwight d . eisenhower .
two republican candidates candidates candidates candidates candidates candidates candidates candidates candidates candidates candidatesttered in 1936 and bob dole in 1996 madhya pradesh .
the drinking age is 21 years old .
a 10 % liquor drink tax is collected for liquor consumed on the licensed premises .
although the sale of cereal malt beverageellant also known as 3.2 beerraction was legalized in 1937 , the first post-prohibition legalization of alcoholic liquor was amended in 1948 .
the following year the legislature enacted the liquor control act .
the power to regulate cereal malt beverage is still with the cities and counties .
liquor-by-the-drink did not become legal until 1986 .
as of november 2006 , kansas still has 29 dry counties and only 17 counties have passed liquor-by-the-drink with no food sales requirement .
today there are more than 2,600 liquor and 4,000 cereal malt beverage licensees in the state .
education in kansas is controlled at the primary and secondary school level by the kansas state department of education .
kansas 's public colleges and universities are controlled by the kansas board of regents .
the board of education has approved changes in the state science curriculum standards that encouraged the teaching of intelligent design .
both times , the standards were changed after changes in the composition of the board in the next election .
many of the band 's members are from there .
joe walsh was born in wichita , kansas .
danny carey was the drummer for tool .
the first album was titled " kansas city native janelle monae " , and the liberal native of kansas city , were in the state of florida .
the state anthem is the american classic home on the range .
the kansas march of 1935 is called " the kansas march " .
the state 's most famous appearance in literature was as the home of dorothy gale , the main character in the novel " the wonderful wizard of oz " exposition 1900 fiba 1900 nationals .
laura ingalls wilder ' " little house on the prairie " , published in 1935 , is a well-known tale about kansas .
kansas was also the setting of the 1965 best-seller " in cold blood " .
mixing fact and fiction , the book talks about the events and aftermath of the 1959 murder of a rich farmer and his family who lived in the small west kansas town of holcomb in finney county .
the story is about a young and adventurous girl named abilene who is sent to the fictional town of manifest , kansas by her father in the summer of 1936 .
kansan clare vanderpool wrote the song .
lawrence is the setting for a number of science fiction writer james gunn 's novels .
the first movie theater in kansas was the patee theater in lawrence .
most theaters at the time only showed movies as part of vaudeville acts but not as an exclusive and stand-alone form of entertainment .
though the patee family had been involved in vaudeville , they believed movies could carry the evening without other variety acts , but in order to show the movies it was necessary for the patee 's to establish a generating plantloid back in 1903 lawrence was not yet electrified .
the patee theater was one of the first of its kind west of the mississippi river .
the projector came from new york city .
kansas has been the setting of many award-winning and popular american movies .
it is listed by the guinness book of world records as the oldest operating movie theater in the world .
in 1926 , the jayhawk theatre opened its doors for the first time to movie going audiences .
the fox theater in hutchinson was built in 1930 .
like the other theaters listed here , the fox still plays first run movies to this day .
sporting kansas city , who play their home games at village west in kansas city , since 2008 , are the first top-tier professional sports league and first major league soccer team to be located within kansas .
in 2011 the team moved to their new home , a $ 165m soccer stadium .
they play in the major league sports teams of kansas city , missouri .
the chiefs and the royals play at the truman sports complex .
fc kansas city , a charter member of the national women 's soccer league , played the 2013 season .
from 1973 to 1997 the flagship radio station for the royals was wibw in topeka .
the denver broncos of the nfl play their sports teams .
two major auto racing facilities are in kansas .
the kansas speedway is in kansas city .
also , the national hot rod association ¥ nhracek holds drag racing events at heartland park topeka .
the sports car club of america has its national headquarters in topeka .
the history of professional sports in kansas was from the beginning of the minor league baseball topeka capitals and leavenworth soldiers in 1886 in the western league .
one year before the " color line " started playing professional baseball .
in 1887 , the western league was dominated by a reorganized topeka team called the golden giants .
the golden giants won an exhibition game from the defending world series champions , the st . louis browns francais the present-day cardinalsroids by a score of 12 – 9 .
topeka was unable to support the team , and it ended after one year .
the first night game in the history of professional baseball was played in independence on april 28,1930 .
the independence team won with a score of 9 to 1 before a crowd of 1,700 spectators .
the governing body for intercollegiate sports in the united states was in 1952 .
many kansans are fans of the state 's major college sports teams .
they have 16 varsity teams and they compete in the big 12 conference .
ku and k-state have tradition-rich programs in men 's basketball .
the jayhawks are a perennial national power , ranking second in all-time victories among ncaa programs , behind kentucky .
the team has won four national titles , including three in 1952,1988 , and 2008 .
the helms foundation was awarded for 1922 and 1923 .
k-state also had a long stretch of success on the hardwood , lasting from the 1940s to the 1980s , making four final fours during that stretch .
in 1988 , ku and k-state met in the elite eight , ku taking the game 71-58 .
the wildcats returned to the ncaa tournament in 2008 .
ku is fifth all-time with 15 final four appearances , while k-state 's four appearances are tied for 17th .
however , success on the gridiron has been less frequent for both ksu and ku .
there have been many breakthroughs for both schools ' football teams .
the team won the orange bowl in 2008 .
bill snyder arrived to coach at k-state in 1989 .
the team won the fiesta bowl in 1997 .
after three seasons in which k-state football languished , snyder came out of retirement in 2009 and guided them to the top of the college football ranks again , finishing second in the big 12 in 2011 and earning a berth in the cotton bowl , and winning the big 12 again in 2012 .
wichita state university is best known for its baseball and basketball programs .
the shockers won the college world series in 1989 .
in men 's basketball , they were in the final four in 1965 and 2013 .
the school also had a football team from 1897 to 1986 .
the shocker football team is known for a plane crash that killed 31 people , including 14 of the team 's players .
notable success has also been done by the state 's smaller schools in football .
pittsburg state university has won four national titles in football .
pittsburg state became the winningest ncaa division ii football program in 1995 .
psu passed hillsdale college at the top of the all-time victories list in the 1995 season on its march to the national runner-up finish .
the gorillas , in 96 seasons of intercollegiate competition , have won 579 victories .
washburn university won the naia men 's basketball championship in 1987 .
fort hays state university men won the 1996 ncaa division ii title with a 34-0 record .
st . benedict 's college tidy now benedictine college rustling , in atchison , won the 1954 and 1967 men 's naia basketball championships .
the kansas collegiate athletic conference has its roots as one of the oldest college sports conferences in existence .
other smaller schools that have some members in kansas are the mid-america intercollegiate athletics association , the midwest christian college conference , and the heart of america athletic conference .
many junior colleges also have active sports programs .
emporia state 's women 's basketball team , under head coach brandon schneider , who is now the women 's basketball coach at the university of kansas , has seen success as well .
they won the ncaa division ii national championship in 2010 .
emporia state and washburn in topeka share a heated rivalry in all sports .
the kansas jayhawk community college conference has been named one of the best conferences in all of njcaa football .
the kansas state high school activities association runs the kansas state high school activities association .
it oversees both athletic and non-athletic competition .
the association is perhaps best known for creating the overtime system now used for almost all football games below the professional level wrestlers wrestlers who have also been used at all levels of canadian football associations .
