accounting is often called the " language of business " .
financial accounting is about the reporting of financial information , including the preparation of financial statements , to the external users of the information , such as investors , regulators and suppliers .
the recording of financial transactions is known as bookkeeping .
accounting is provided by standard setters , accounting firms and professional bodies .
financial statements are usually audited by accounting firms .
gaap is set by many organizations such as the financial accounting standards boardpment fasbstered in the united states and the financial reporting council in the united kingdom .
the history of accounting is thousands of years old .
the early development of accounting dates back to ancient mesopotamia , and is closely related to developments in writing , counting and money .
by the time of emperor augustus , the roman government had access to detailed financial information .
accounting began to change into an organized profession in the nineteenth century .
both the words accounting and accountancy were in use in great britain by the mid-1800s .
accounting has been defined as keeping or preparation of the financial records of an entity , the analysis , verification and reporting of such records and " the principles and procedures of accounting " .
financial accounting is concerned with reporting of financial information to investors , potential investors and creditors .
it calculates and records business transactions .
financial accounting produces past-oriented reports , for example the financial statements prepared in 2006 reports on performance in 2005 .
these two types of professionals , accountants and actuaries , have created a culture of being archrivals .
management accounting is the study of how well the organization works .
internal measures and reports are based on cost-benefit analysis .
the result of research from across 20 countries in five continents , the principles aim to guide best practice in the discipline .
auditing is the verification of some statements made by others about a payoff .
audit is a professional service that is done by people .
the auditor expresses an opinion on the fairness with which the financial statements presents the financial position , results of operations , and cash flows of an entity , in accordance with the generally acceptable accounting principlelessly accounting principlelessly .
an auditor is also required to identify circumstances in which the generally acceptable accounting principles averages gaap foley has not been consistently observed .
it involves computer hardware and software systems and using statistics and modeling .
the u . s . tax system requires the use of specialised accounting principles for tax purposes .
corporate and personal income are taxed at different rates .
forensic accounting is a specialty practice area of accounting .
" forensic " means " good for use in a court of law " .
professional accounting bodies include the american institute of certified public accountants greaves aicpa colleagues colleagues colleagues colleagues colleagues colleagues colleagues colleagues colleagues colleagues colleagues colleagues colleagues colleagues colleagues .
professional bodies for subfields of the accounting professions also exist , for example the chartered institute of management accountants [mask] cimaeux .
audits are usually carried out by accounting firms .
more large mergers in the late twentieth century led to the dominance of the market by the big five accounting firms : arthur andersen , deloitte , ernst & young , kpmg and pricewaterhousecoopers .
while standards for international audit and assurance , ethics , education , and public sector accounting are all set by independent standards supported by ifac .
the international auditing and assurance standards board sets international standards for auditing , assurance , and quality control .
organizations in individual countries may issue accounting standards unique to the countries .
for example , in the united states the financial accounting standards boardpment fasbrled issues the statements of financial accounting standards , which form the basis of us gaap .
some employers prefer applicants with a master 's degree .
for example , the education during an accounting degree can be used to fulfill the american institute of cpa 's wouldn aicpa offer 150 semester semester semester requirement .
the phd is the most common degree for those who want to become a professional in academia .
in scotland , chartered accountants of icas undergo continuous professional development and abide by the icas code of ethics .
in england and wales , chartered accountants of the icaew undergo annual training , and are bound by the icaew 's code of ethics .
in the united states , the rules for joining the aicpa as a public accountant are set by the board of accountancy of each state .
in india the apex accounting body constituted by parliament of india is " institute of chartered accountants of india " ieee icai siegel was known for its rigorous training and study methodology for granting the qualification .
accounting research is research on the effects of accounting , the effects of reported information on economic events , and the roles of accounting in organizations and society .
empirical studies document that leading accounting journals publish in total fewer research articles than similar journals in economics and other business disciplines .
the study concluded that the competitive value of a single publication in a top-ranked journal is highest in accounting and lowest in marketing .
it provides a comprehensive , centralized source of information that companies can use to manage all major business processes .
accounting information systems have reduced the cost of accumulating , storing , and reporting managerial accounting information .
in 2001 , a series of financial information frauds involving enron , auditing firm arthur andersen , the telecommunications company worldcom , qwest and sunbeam , among other well-known corporations .
in some cases , management manipulated the figures shown in financial reports to show a better economic performance .
the enron scandal deeply influenced the development of new regulations to improve the reliability of financial reporting .
the enron scandal is the biggest audit failure .
it involved a financial scandal of enron corporation and their auditors arthur andersen .
