an abortion is the end of a pregnancy by removal or expulsion of an embryo or fetus before it can survive outside the uterus .
an abortion is an abortion that happens without intervention .
when a woman is pregnant , it is called an abortion .
the term " abortion " generally means an abortion .
a similar procedure after the fetus has potential to survive outside the womb is known as a " late-term abortion " .
unsafe abortion is a major cause of maternal death .
making safe abortion legal and accessible reduces maternal deaths .
it is safer than childbirth .
modern methods use medication or surgery for abortions .
the drug mifepristone in combination with prostaglandin appears to be as safe and effective as surgery during the first and second trimester of pregnancy .
the most common way to dilating the cervix is to the hospital .
birth control , such as the pill , can be used right after abortion .
induced abortions do not increase the risk of long-term mental or physical problems .
unsafe abortions are performed by unskilled individuals , with hazardous equipment , or in unsanitary facilities induces 47,000 deaths and 5 million hospital admissions each year .
the world health organization says that abortion should be available to all women .
about 45 % of the abortions are done unsafely .
abortion rates changed little between 2003 and 2008 .
in 2008,40 % of the world 's women had legal abortions without limits .
different countries have different laws regarding late in abortion .
historically , abortions have been attempted using herbal medicines , sharp tools , forceful massage , or through other traditional methods .
abortions are different from all around the world .
in some places , abortion is legal only in certain cases such as rape , problems with the fetus , poverty , risk to a woman 's health , or incest .
there is debate over the moral , ethical , and legal issues of abortion .
those who oppose abortion often argue that an embryo or fetus is a human with a right to life .
those who support the legality of abortion often believe that abortion is part of a woman 's right to make decisions about her own body .
others favor legal and accessible abortion as a public health measure .
induced abortion may be called " therapeutic " because it is a health condition that is caused by a woman 's fetustustus thereof .
about 205 million pregnancies happen every year .
over a third are unintended .
most abortions result from unintended pregnancies .
in the united kingdom , about 1 % of abortions are done .
a pregnancy can be done in several ways .
the manner selected often depends upon the gestational age of the embryo or fetus , which increases in size as the embryo becomes progresses .
specific procedures may also be selected due to legality , regional availability , and doctor or a woman 's personal preference .
reasons for abortions are usually defined as either therapeutic or elective .
an abortion is a medical term which means it is performed to save the life of the pregnant woman .
an abortion is an abortion in the united states .
confusion sometimes arises over the term " elective " .
miscarriage is the unintentional removal of an embryo or fetus before the 24th week of gestation .
a pregnancy that ends before 37 weeks of gestation is a premature birth .
when a fetus dies in utero after being released , it is usually called " stillborn " .
premature births and stillbirths are generally not considered to be miscarriages .
only about 50 % of conceptions go past the first trimester .
most pregnancies are lost before medical practitioners can detect an embryo .
between 15 % and 30 % of pregnancies end in miscarriage , depending on the age and health of the pregnant woman .
80 % of these spontaneous abortions happen in the first trimester .
the most common cause of spontaneous abortion during the first trimester is chromosomal abnormalities of the embryo or fetus .
other causes include lupustsky , diabetes , other hormonal problems , infection , and abnormalities of the uterus .
the two leading factors are that cause spontaneous abortions .
a spontaneous abortion can also be caused by accidental trauma .
medical abortions are induced by abortifacient pharmaceuticals .
medical abortion became an alternative method of abortion .
the most common early-trimester medical abortion regimens use mifepristone in combination with misoprostol ezio or sometimes another prostaglandin analog , gemeprostjured up to 10 weeks .
mifepristone – misoprostol combination regimens work faster than methotrexate – misoprostol combination regimens .
this is effective in the second trimester .
doctors doctors doctors who have mifepristone followed by misoprostol in the cheek between 24 and 48 hours later are effective when done before 70 days ' gestation .
in very early abortions , up to 7 weeks gestation , medical abortion using a mifepristone – misoprostol combination regimen is considered to be more effective than surgical abortion stretches .
early medical abortions using mifepristone , followed 24-48 hours later by buccal or vaginal misoprostol are 98 % effective up to 9 weeks gestational age ; from 9 to 10 weeks efficacy decreases modestly to 94 % .
if medical abortion fails , surgical abortion must be used to complete the surgery .
early medical abortions account for the majority of abortions before 9 weeks gestation in britain , france , switzerland , and the nordic countries .
in the united states , the percentage of early medical abortions performed in non-hospital facilities is 31 % as of 2014 .
the most common methods are used for second-trimester abortions in canada , most of europe , china and india .
up to 15 weeks ' gestation , suction-aspiration or vacuum aspiration are the most common medical methods of induced abortion .
" manual vacuum aspiration " uses an electric vacuum aspiration .
these techniques can both be used early in pregnancy .
mva can be used up to 14 weeks .
mva -lrb- also called " mini-suction " and " menstrual extraction " -rrb- is a very useful tool in the pregnancy .
dilation and curettageographic refers to opening the cervix× dilation and removing tissueegation ashore by suction or sharp instruments .
d & c is a standard gynecological procedure performed for a variety of reasons .
the world health organization says that there should be no " sharp curettage " if suction is not available .
dilation and evacuation evacuation happens after 12 to 16 weeks .
d & e is performed vaginally .
it is used after 18 to 20 weeks when removal of an intact fetus improves surgical safety or for other reasons .
abortion may also be done surgically .
a hysterotomy abortion is a procedure similar to a caesarean section .
it requires a smaller cut than a caesarean section .
gravid hysterectomy is surgery to remove the whole uterus while taking care of the pregnancy .
hysterotomy and hysterectomy are associated with much higher rates of maternal morbidity and mortality than d & e or induction abortion .
first-trimester procedures can be performed with local anesthesia .
in places that have necessary medical skill for dilation and extraction , or where preferred by practitioners , an abortion can be induced by first inducing labor and then inducing fetal demise if necessary .
this is sometimes called miscarriage .
this procedure may be done from 13 weeks gestation to the third trimester .
in the united states , many abortions are labor-induced abortions in sweden and other nearby countries .
only limited data are available comparing this method with dilation and extraction .
however , unlike d & e , abortions after 18 weeks may be complicated by brief fetal survival .
for this reason , labor-induced abortion is legally risky in the united states .
historically , a number of herbs reputed to have abortifacient properties have been used in folk medicine .
among these are : tansy , pennyroyal , black cohosh , and the now-extinct silphium .
in 1978 one woman in colorado died .
because the use of herbs as abortifacients can cause serious side effects , such as multiple organ failure , such as multiple organ failure , such use is not recommended by physicians .
sometimes , abortion is done by causing trauma to the abdomen .
the degree of force , if severe , can cause serious internal injuries without necessarily succeeding in inducing miscarriage .
in southeast asia , there is an ancient tradition of attempting abortion through forceful abdominal massage .
one of the bas reliefs in the temple of angkor wat in cambodia shows a demon performing such an abortion upon a woman who has been sent to the underworld .
self-induced abortion is a form of misoprostol and non-surgical implements such as knitting needles and clothes hangers into the uterus .
this is called " induced miscarriage " .
this method is rarely used in countries where surgical abortion is legal and available .
the health risks of abortion depend mainly on whether the procedure is performed safely or unsafely .
unsafe abortions are those performed by unskilled individuals , with hazardous equipment , or in unsanitary facilities .
legal abortions performed in the developed world are among the safest procedures in medicine .
in the united states , abortion is about 14 times safer than women .
the us abortion mortality rate is 0.7 maternal deaths per 100,000 procedures .
in the united states from 2000 to 2009 , abortion had lower mortality rate than plastic surgery .
five years after seeking abortion services , women who gave birth after being denied an abortion reported worse health than women who had either first or second trimester abortions .
the risk of abortion-related deaths increases with gestational age , but remains lower than that of childbirth .
outpatient abortion is as safe from 64 to 70 days in gestation .
vacuum aspiration in the first trimester is the safest method of surgical abortion .
complications , which are rare , can include uterine perforation , pelvic infection , and retained products of conception .
infections account for one-third of the abortion-related deaths in the united states .
the rate of complications of vacuum aspiration abortion in the first trimester is similar .
preventive antibiotics repeal , such as doxycycline or metronidazolechia , are typically given before abortion procedures , as they are believed to reduce the risk of postoperative uterine infection .
the rate of failed procedures is not very different .
complications after second-trimester abortion are similar to those after first-trimester abortion .
second-trimester abortions are generally tolerated .
there is very little difference in terms of safety and efficacy between medical abortion .
medical abortion using the prostaglandin analog misoprostol alone is less effective and more painful than medical abortion using a combined regimen of mifepristone and misoprostol or surgical abortion .
some risks of abortion are promoted mainly by anti-abortion groups , but lack scientific support .
for example , the question of a link between induced abortion and breast cancer has been investigated extensively .
the american congress of obgyn concluded that abortion does not cause breast cancer .
in the past , even illegality has not automatically meant that abortions were unsafe .
historian linda gordon said : " in fact , illegal abortions in this country have an impressive safety record . "
the authors jerome bates and edward zawadzki describe the case of an illegal abortionist in the early 20th century who was proud of having completed 13,844 abortions without any fatality .
in 1870s , the famous abortionist madame restellheimer -lrb- anna trow -rrb- lohmanhmanhman foley , appears to have lost very few women among her more than 100,000 patients .
in 1936 the prominent professor of obstetrics and gynecology frederick j . taussig wrote that a cause of increasing mortality during the years of illegality in the u . s . was that that that there was a cause of increasing deaths in the us was that in the united states was that in the united states was that was that .
current evidence finds no relationship between most induced abortions and mental-health problems other than those expected for any unwanted pregnancy .
the american psychological association said that a woman 's first abortion is not a threat to mental health when carried out in the first trimester .
some older reviews said that abortion was associated with an increased risk of psychological problems .
some studies show that negative mental health results in women who choose abortions after the first trimester because of fetal abnormalities , more rigorous research would be needed to show this conclusively .
some proposed negative effects of abortion have been referred to by anti-abortion advocates as a separate condition called post-abortion syndrome .
women seeking an abortion may use unsafe methods , especially when abortion is legally restricted .
they may try to seek the help of a person without proper medical training or facilities .
this can lead to severe complications , such as incomplete abortion , sepsis , hemorrhage , and damage to internal organs .
unsafe abortions are a major cause of injury and death among women worldwide .
about 20 million unsafe abortions are performed annually , with 97 % taking place in developing countries .
unsafe abortions may result in millions of injuries .
estimates of deaths vary according to methodology , and have ranged from 37,000 to 70,000 in the past decade ; deaths from unsafe abortion account for around 13 % of all maternal deaths .
the world health organization believes that mortality has fallen since the 1990s .
to reduce the number of unsafe abortions , public health organizations have generally advocated the legalization of abortion , training of medical personnel , and ensuring access to reproductive-health services .
in response , opponents of abortion say that abortion bans in no way affect prenatal care for women who choose to carry their fetus to term .
the dublin declaration on maternal health , signed in 2012 , said that abortion should not affect , in any way , the availability of best care to pregnant women .
an important factor in whether abortions are performed safely or not is the legal standing of abortion .
countries with restrictive abortion laws have higher rates of unsafe abortion .
for example , the 1996 legalization of abortion in south africa had an immediate positive effect on the frequency of abortion-related complications , with abortion-related deaths dropping by more than 90 % .
similar reductions in maternal mortality have been observed after other countries have liberalized their abortion laws , such as romania and nepal .
in the united states , there are some state-level anti-abortion laws .
the analysis , however , did not take into account travel to other states without such laws to obtain an abortion .
in addition , a lack of access to effective contraception helps to unsafe abortion .
it has been estimated that the number of unsafe abortions could be reduced by up to 75 %ements from 20 million to 5 million annually .
rates of such abortions can be difficult to measure because they can be reported variously as miscarriage , miscarriage , miscarriage , miscarriage , and mini-abortion .
forty percent of the world 's women are able to access therapeutic and elective abortions within gestational limits .
unsafe abortions result in 70,000 deaths and 5 million disabilities per year .
complications of unsafe abortion account for approximately an eighth of maternal mortalities worldwide , though this varies by region .
infertility , an unsafe abortion affects about 24 million women .
the number of unsafe abortions has increased between 1995 and 2008 .
health education , access to family planning , and improvements in health care during and after abortion have been proposed to address this phenomenon .
in 2019 , a u . s . senate bill entitled the " born-alive abortion survivors protection act " raised the issue of live birth after abortion .
the bill would say that medical providers will resuscitate neonates delivered during an abortion process .
during the debate around this issue , us republicans accused that medical providers " execute " live-born babies .
existing us laws would punish execution as homicide .
the us abortion experts say that a " born-alive " fetus is a common event and reject laws that would mandate resuscitation against the wishes of the parents .
only 1.3 % of abortions happen after 21 weeks of pregnancy in the united states .
although it is very rare , women who have an abortion after this gestational age sometimes give birth to a fetus that may survive briefly .
the periviable period is between 20 and 25 weeks gestation .
long-term survival is possible after only two weeks .
however , survival between 22 and 23 weeks are 2-3 % .
this means survival of a neonate without later damage to organs such as the bowel is 1 % at 22 weeks and 13 % at 23 weeks .
survival odds increase with increasing gestational age .
if the medical staff observe signs of life , they may be required to provide emergency medical care .
induced fetal end before the pregnancy is ended .
induced fetal ends in the safety of an abortion procedure .
in many places , abortion is illegal .
for this reason , the number of abortions must be made without knowing certainty related to standard error .
the number of abortions performed worldwide seems to have remained stable in recent years , with 41.6 million having been performed in 2003 and 43.8 million having been performed in 2008 .
the abortion rate was 28 per 1000 women .
in 2008 , the estimated that in 2008 , the estimated abortion percentage of known pregnancies is at 21 % worldwide , with 26 % in developed countries and 20 % in developing countries .
in some countries with more liberal abortions , the number of abortions is similar .
restrictive abortion laws are associated with increases in the percentage of abortions performed unsafely .
the unsafe abortion rate in developing countries is partly attributable to lack of access to modern contraceptives .
induced abortion is a very common law in the united states .
in 2008 , the report of employees of the guttmacher institute found that there were 7 per 1000 womenttered germany and switzerland submitted to 30 per 1000 women paces estonia percival percivallberg in countries with complete statistics in 2008 .
the proportion of pregnancies that ended in induced abortion ranged from about 10 %hora israel , the netherlands and switzerland .
in 2002 , an american research found that about half of women having abortions were using a form of contraception at the time of becoming pregnant .
inconsistent use was reported by half of those using condoms .
the guttmacher institute believes that most abortions in the united states are obtained by minority women .
the abortion rate may also be expressed as the average number of abortions a woman has during her reproductive years .
abortion rates also vary depending on the type of pregnancy .
in 2003 , the centers for disease control and prevention chongqing cdc cdc said that 26 % of reported legal induced abortions in the united states were known to have been obtained at less than 6 weeks ' gestation , 18 % at 8 weeks , 15 % at 9 through 10 weeks , 10 through 12 weeks , 12,12 -lrb- 20 % -rrb- , 12 -lrb- 20-12 -rrb- , and more than 20 weeks at 12 weeks -lrb- 13-20-12-12 -rrb- .
91 % of these were said to be done by " curettage "chment , dilation and evacuation .
according to the cdc , due to data collection difficulties , the data must be viewed as tentative .
the guttmacher institute estimated there were 2,200 intact dilation and extraction procedures in the u . s . during 2000 .
in england and wales in 2006,89 % of the workers had finished at or under 12 weeks , 9 % between 13 and 19 weeks , and 2 % at or over 20 weeks .
64 % of those reported were by vacuum aspiration , 6 % by d & e , and 30 % were medical .
more than in developed countries , there are more abortions .
the reasons why women have abortions are different .
some of the reasons may include an inability to afford a child , domestic violence , feeling they are too young , and the wish to complete education or career .
more reasons include not being willing to raise a child conceived as a result of rape or incest .
some abortions have undergone as a result of societal pressures .
these might include the preference for children of a specific sex or race , stigmatization of people with disabilities , lack of access to or rejection of contraceptive methods , or efforts toward population controlhesis such as china 's one-child policy .
these factors can sometimes result in compulsory abortion .
an additional factor is risk to maternal or fetal health .
in the united states , the supreme court decisions in " roe v . wade " and " doe v . bolton " said that the state 's interest in the life of the fetus became compelling only at the point of viability .
even after the point of being in the state , the state shall favor the life of the fetus over the life or health of the pregnant woman .
under the right of privacy , physicians must be allowed to use their " medical judgment for the preservation of the life or health of the mother " .
on the same day that the court decided roe , it also decided that the medical judgment may be exercised in the light of all factors : physical , emotional , psychological , familial , and the woman 's age relevant to the well-being of the patient .
these factors may be health .
this allows the room he needs to make his best medical judgment .
sherri finkbine 's discovery during her fifth month of pregnancy that she had been exposed to thalidomide .
she could not get a legal abortion in the united states .
from 1962 to 1965 , an outbreak of german measles left 15,000 babies with severe birth defects .
in 1967 , the american medical association supported liberalization of abortion laws .
a national opinion research center poll in 1965 showed 73 % supported abortion when the mother 's life was at risk , 57 % when birth defects were present and 59 % for pregnancies resulting from rape or incest .
in many cases , cancer of the mother may lead to consideration of abortion to protect the life of the mother .
for example , initiation of treatment is performed with preservation of fetal life unless neoadjuvant chemotherapy is chosen .
very early stage cervical cancers may be treated by radical hysterectomy and pelvic lymph node dissection , radiation therapy , or both , while later stages are treated by radiotherapy .
chemotherapy may be used at the same time .
treatment of breast cancer during pregnancy also involves fetal considerations .
the virus can cause a 7.5 – 17 % risk of teratogenic effects on the fetus .
treatment with more than 40 gy of radiation causes spontaneous abortion .
exposure to much lower doses during the first trimester , especially 8 to 15 weeks of development , can cause intellectual disability or microcephaly .
exposures above 0.005-0.025 gy cause a dose-dependent reduction in iq .
it is possible to reduce exposure to radiation with abdominal shielding , depending on how far the area to be irradiated is from the fetus .
the process of birth may also put the mother at risk .
" vaginal delivery " may result in dissemination of neoplastic cells into lymphovascular channels , haemorrhage , cervical laceration and implantation of malignant cells in the episiotomy site , while abdominal delivery may delay the initiation of non-surgical treatment . "
traditionally abortions have been done using herbal medicines , sharp tools , or with force .
induced abortion has long history and can be traced back to civilizations as varied as china under shennong lilith , ancient egypt with its ebers papyrus papyrus papyrus papyrus c . 1550 bc percival , and the roman empire in the time of juvenalusia .
there is evidence to suggest that pregnancies were terminated through a number of methods .
one of the earliest known artistic representations of abortion is in a bas relief at angkor watlland .
it shows the technique of abdominal abortion .
other scholars disagree with this interpretation , and state that the medical texts of hippocratic corpus contain descriptions of abortive techniques right alongside the oath .
the physician scribonius largus wrote in 43 ad that the hippocratic oath prohibits abortion , as did soranus , although apparently not all doctors adhered to it strictly at the time .
according to soranus ' first or 2nd century ce work " gynaecology " , one party of medical practitioners banished all abortives as required by the hippocratic oath ; the other party — to which he belonged — was willing to prescribe abortions , but only for the sake of the mother 's health .
aristotle , in his book on government " politics " , condemns infanticide as a means of population control .
he preferred abortion in such cases , with the restriction " that it must be practised on it before it has developed sensation and life .
in christianity , pope sixtus v ¥ 1585 – 90 foley was the only pope before 1869 to say that abortion is homicide regardless of the stage of pregnancy ; and his pronouncement of 1588 was reversed three years later by his successor .
the catholic church was divided on whether it believed that abortion was murder .
in fact , several historians have written that before the 19th century most catholic authors did not say that abortion was ended before " quickening " or " ensoulment " as an abortion .
protestant christians are the least likely to do so .
islamic tradition has traditionally permitted abortion until a point in time when muslims believe the soul enters the fetus , considered by various theologians to be at conception , 40 days after conception , or quickening .
however , abortion is largely restricted or forbidden in areas of high islamic faith such as the middle east and north africa .
in europe and north america , abortion techniques advanced in the 17th century .
however , conservatism by most physicians with regards to sexual matters prevented the wide expansion of safe abortion techniques .
other medical practitioners in addition to some physicians advertised their services .
in the church , physicians were influential in anti-abortion movements .
in the united states , abortion was more dangerous than childbirth .
other sources say that in the 19th century early abortions under the hygienic conditions in which midwives usually worked were relatively safe .
some commentators have argued that despite improved medical procedures , the period from the 1930s until legalization also saw more zealous enforcement of anti-abortion laws , and concomitantly an increasing control of abortion providers by organized crime .
soviet russia ¥ 1919 iihf , iceland ¥ 1935graphs , and sweden independently 1938 iihf were among the first countries to legalize certain forms of abortion .
in 1935 , a law was passed allowing abortions for those deemed " hereditarily ill " .
in the second half of the twentieth century , abortion was legalized in a bigger number of countries .
induced abortion is controversial .
ethical , moral , philosophical , biological , religious and legal issues are related to value systems .
abortion may be about the rights of women and women .
in both public and private debate , arguments showed in favor of or against abortion access .
the world medical association declaration on therapeutic abortion notes , " circumstances bringing the interests of a mother into conflict with the interests of her unborn child create a dilemma and raise the question as to whether or not the abortion should be terminated . "
abortion debates , especially about abortion laws , are often led by groups advocating one of these two positions .
anti-abortion groups who favor greater legal restrictions on abortion , including complete prohibition , most often call themselves pro-life .
in the former , the fetus is a human human human person with a right to live abortion morally the same as murder .
the right to decide whether or not to carry a pregnancy to term .
current laws about abortion are diverse .
religious , moral , and cultural factors have an effect on abortion .
the right to life , the right to liberty , the right to reproductive health and the right to reproductive health are major issues of human rights .
in jurisdictions where abortion is legal , certain requirements must often be met before a woman may obtain a safe , legal abortion abortion performed without the woman 's consent is considered feticide globally .
these requirements usually depend on the age of the fetus .
some jurisdictions require a waiting period before the procedure .
other jurisdictions may require that a woman obtain the consent of the fetus ' father before aborting the fetus .
there are many different kinds of emergency situations .
china has now had a two child policy .
other jurisdictions ban abortion almost entirely .
many , but not all , of these allow legal abortions in a variety of circumstances .
the fetus ' development is impaired , the woman 's physical or mental well-being is endangered , or socioeconomic considerations make childbirth a hardship .
in countries where abortion is banned entirely , such as nicaragua , doctors have recorded a lot of deaths .
some countries , such as bangladesh , that nominally ban abortion , may also support clinics that perform abortions under the guise of menstrual hygiene .
this is also a term in traditional medicine .
in places where abortion is illegal or carries heavy social stigma , pregnant women may engage in medical tourism and travel to countries where they can terminate their pregnancies .
women without the means to travel can apply to providers of illegal abortions or attempt to perform an abortion by themselves .
the organization women on waves provides education about medical abortions since 1999 .
the ngo created a mobile medical clinic inside a shipping container .
because the ships are registered in the netherlands , dutch law is used when the ship is in international waters .
while in port , the organization provides free workshops and education .
amniocentesis allows parents to determine the sex before birth .
the development of this technology has led to sex-selective abortion , or the end of a fetus based on sex .
the end of a female fetus is very common .
in some countries , the birth rate of male and female children is also in some countries .
the preference for male children is reported in many areas of asia .
this is not the standard birth rate of males and females .
in china , a historical preference for a male child has been exacerbated by the one-child policy , which was enacted in 1979 .
many countries have taken legislative steps to reduce the number of abortions .
at the international conference on population and development in 1994 over 180 states agreed to eliminate all forms of discrimination against the girl child and the root causes of son preference .
the world health organization and unicef , along with other united nations , have found that measures to reduce access to abortion are much less effective at reducing sex-selective abortions than measures to reduce gender inequality .
in a number of cases , abortion providers and these facilities have been subjected to various forms of violence , including murder , kidnapping , stalking , assault , arson , and bombing .
anti-abortion violence is classified by both governmental and scholarly sources as terrorism .
in the u . s . and canada , over 8,000 incidents of violence , trespassing , and death threats have been recorded by providers since 1977 .
abortion opponents have not been involved in violent acts .
in the united states , four physicians who performed abortions have been murdered .
other people at the u . s . and australia , have been other people at abortion clinics , including receptionists and security guards such as james barrett , shannon lowney , lee ann nichols , and robert sanderson .
woundings shouldered e . g . , garson romaliseration and attempted murders have also taken place in the united states and canada .
hundreds of bombings , arsons , acid attacks , invasions , and incidents of vandalism against abortion providers have occurred .
notable perpetrators of anti-abortion violence include scott roeder , shelley shannon , and paul jennings hill , the first person to be executed in the united states for killing an abortion provider .
legal protection of abortion is legal in some countries .
these laws are usually to protect abortion clinics from obstruction , vandalism , picketing , and other actions .
much more common than physical violence is psychological pressure .
in 2003 , chris danze started pro-life organizations in texas to prevent the construction of a planned parenthood facility in austin .
the organizations released personal information online , of those involved with construction , sending them up to 1200 phone calls a day and contacting their churches .
some protestors record women entering clinics on camera .
spontaneous abortion happens in many animals .
in sheep it may be caused by crowding through doors or being chased by dogs .
in cows , abortion may be caused by contagious disease , such as brucellosis or campylobacter .
pine needles can also induce abortions in cows .
several plants , including broomweed , skunk cabbage , poison hemlock , and tree tobacco , are known to cause fetal deformities and abortion in cattle and in sheep and goats .
in horses , a fetus may be unable to be bought .
foal embryos that are homozygous for the dominant white gene mutations are theorized to be aborted or resorbed before birth .
in many species of sharks and rays , stress induced abortions occur frequently on capture .
in dogs , an abortion can cause a viral infection .
cats can have an abortion for many reasons .
a combined abortion is performed on pregnant cats , especially in trap-neuter-return programs , to prevent unwanted kittens from being born .
female rodents may terminate a pregnancy when exposed to the smell of a male .
abortion may also be induced in animals .
for example , abortion may be induced in mares that have been mated improperly , or that have been purchased by owners who did not realize the mares were pregnant , or that are pregnant with twin foals .
feticide can occur in horses and zebras .
male gray langur monkeys may attack females following male takeover , causing miscarriage .
