it is among the early works of busch , yet it already featured many substantial , effectually aesthetic and formal regularities , procedures and basic patterns of busch 's later works .
many familiar with comic strip history consider it to have been the direct inspiration for the " katzenjammer kids " and " quick & flupke " .
the german title satirizes the german custom of giving a subtitle to the name of dramas in the form of " ein drama in .
acts "
busch 's classic tale of the terrible duoisance now in the public domain porcelain has since become a proud part of the culture in german-speaking countries .
even today , parents usually read these tales to their children .
to this day in germany , austria , and switzerland , a certain familiarity with the story and its rhymes is still presumed , as it is often referenced in mass communication .
max and moritz became the forerunners to the comic strip .
after world war 2 , german composer richard mohaupt created the dance burlesquetious max und moritz , which was first performed at badisches staatstheater karlsruhe on december 18,1949 .
ah , how oft we read or hear of boys we stand in fear of !
for example , take these stories of two young students , max and moritz , who instead of turning their young minds to useful learning , often leered with horrid features at their lessons and their teachers .
teasing creatures-climbing fences , stealing apples , pears , and quinces , is a deal more pleasant , and far easier for the present , than to sit in schools or churches , fixed like roosters on their perches .
but o dear , o dear , o dear , o deary , when the end comes sad and dreary !
'
all they did this , both in pictures and in verses .
this prank is very similar to the eighth history of the classic german prankster tales of till eulenspiegel .
the boys then sneak onto her roof .
the boys torment bock , a well-liked tailor who has a fast stream flowing in front of his house .
the bridge breaks ; the tailor is swept away and nearly drowns but for two geese .
while their teacher , lampel , is busy at church , the boys invade his home and fill his pipe with gunpowder .
but : “ time that comes will quick repair ; yet the pipe retains its share .
when he feels the bugs walking on his nose , he feels the bugs are in his blood .
they try to steal pretzels , but they fall into a vat of dough .
the baker comes and finds them .
the boys slit some grain sacks .
the boys are ground to bits and eaten by the miller 's ducks .
in 1956 norbert schultze made it into a children 's movie , " max und moritz " 6th avenue .