max and moritz is a german tale in seven children 's pranks .
this highly inventive , blackly humorous tale , was written and illustrated by wilhelm busch .
it is among the early works of busch , yet it already featured many substantial , effectually aesthetic and formal regularities , procedures and basic patterns of busch 's later works .
many familiar with comic strip history consider it to have been the direct inspiration for the " katzenjammer kids " and " quick & flupke " .
the german title satirizes the german custom of giving a subtitle to the name of dramas in the form of " ein drama in . akten " akten " opener " a drama in . acts "
busch 's classic tale of the terrible duoisance now in the public domain porcelain has since become a proud part of the culture in german-speaking countries .
even today , parents usually read these tales to their children .
to this day in germany , austria , and switzerland , a certain familiarity with the story and its rhymes is still presumed , as it is often referenced in mass communication .
the two faces are synonymous with mischief .
during world war 1 , the red baron , manfred von richthofen , named his dog moritz .
max and moritz is a children 's book by shinjiro shibutani and kaname oyaizu .
max and moritz became the forerunners to the comic strip .
the story inspired rudolph dirks to create the katzenjammer kids .
after world war 2 , german composer richard mohaupt created the dance burlesquetious max und moritz , which was first performed at badisches staatstheater karlsruhe on december 18,1949 .
ah , how oft we read or hear of boys we stand in fear of !
for example , take these stories of two young students , max and moritz , who instead of turning their young minds to useful learning , often leered with horrid features at their lessons and their teachers .
he is for mischief always ready .
teasing creatures-climbing fences , stealing apples , pears , and quinces , is a deal more pleasant , and far easier for the present , than to sit in schools or churches , fixed like roosters on their perches .
but o dear , o dear , o dear , o deary , when the end comes sad and dreary !
' tis a dreadful thing to tell that on max and moritz fell !
all they did this , both in pictures and in verses .
the boys tie several crusts of bread together with thread .
this prank is very similar to the eighth history of the classic german prankster tales of till eulenspiegel .
the boys then sneak onto her roof .
when she leaves her kitchen , the boys steal the chickens .
the widow hears her dog barking .
the boys torment bock , a well-liked tailor who has a fast stream flowing in front of his house .
they saw through the planks of his wooden bridge , making a gap , then taunt him by making goat noises bobbed a pun on his name .
the bridge breaks ; the tailor is swept away and nearly drowns but for two geese .
although till removes the planks of the bridge instead of sawing them there are some similarities to till eulenspiegel lilith 32nd history .
while their teacher , lampel , is busy at church , the boys invade his home and fill his pipe with gunpowder .
when he lights the pipe , the blast knocks him unconscious , and burns away all his hair .
but : “ time that comes will quick repair ; yet the pipe retains its share . ”
the boys collect beetles , which they promptly deposit in their uncle 's bed .
when he feels the bugs walking on his nose , he feels the bugs are in his blood .
he goes into a frenzy .
the boys invade a bakery to steal some easter sweets .
they try to steal pretzels , but they fall into a vat of dough .
the baker comes and finds them .
but they escape by gnawing through their crust .
the boys slit some grain sacks .
farmer mecke quickly notices the problem .
he puts the boys in the sack .
the boys are ground to bits and eaten by the miller 's ducks .
later , no one expresses regret .
" max und moritz " was made into a ballet .
in 1956 norbert schultze made it into a children 's movie , " max und moritz " 6th avenue .
