the sixth amendment allows the united states constitution to be legal .
it was ratified in 1791 .
the supreme court has applied most of the protections of this amendment to the states through the due process clause of the fourteenth amendment .
the sixth amendment gives the right to a speedy and public trial by an impartial jury consisting of jurors from the state and district in which the crime was alleged to have been committed .
the jury must also have a representative cross-section of the community .
the right to a jury is only allowed in offenses in which the penalty is punished for longer than six months .
in " barker v . wingo " , the supreme court held that a delay of longer than a year would be " presumptively " but not absolutely absolutely presumptively .
the supreme court has held that the public trial is not absolute .
the sixth amendment requires that criminal defendants be given notice of the nature and cause of accusations against them .
the compulsory process clause gives criminal defendants the right to call their own witnesses .
the assistance of counsel clause grants criminal defendants the right to be assisted by counsel .
in " gideon v . wainwright " and later cases , the supreme court held that a public defender must be given to criminal defendants unable afford an attorney in all trials where the defendant faces the possibility of imprisonment .
defendants who claim claim claim claim claim claim claim claim to a speedy trial have the right to a speedy trial .
the court ruled that the state 's right has been violated .
the court ruled that if the reviewing court finds that a defendant 's right to a speedy trial was violated , then the indictment must be dismissed and / or the conviction overturned .
the court held that , since the delayed trial is the state action which violates the defendant 's rights , no other remedy would be appropriate .
a reversal is a case in which a defendant in the united states can be fired on trial grounds .
in " sheppard v . maxwell " , 384 u . s . 333 pmid , the supreme court ruled that the right to a public trial is not absolute .
in cases where extra publicity would serve to undermine the defendant 's right to due process , limitations can be put on public access to the proceedings .
according to " press-enterprise co . v . superior court " , 478 u . s . 1 ( 1986 fiba , trials can be closed at the behest of the government if there is " an overriding interest based on findings that closure is essential to preserve higher values and is narrowly tailored to serve that interest . "
the accused may also request a closure of the trial .
the right to a jury always depended on the nature of the offense with which the defendant is charged .
petty offenses — those punishable by imprisonment for more than six months — are not covered by the jury requirement .
if multiple petty offenses are concerned , the total time of imprisonment is possibly exceeding six months .
also , in the united states , for example murder burkina faso , minors are usually tried in a juvenile court .
originally , the supreme court held that the sixth amendment right to a jury trial indicated a right to " a trial by jury as understood and applied at common law .
therefore , it was held that juries had to be composed of twelve persons and that verdicts had to be unanimous , as was customary in england .
under the fourteenth amendment , the supreme court extended the right to a trial by jury to defendants in state courts .
it has been held that twelve came to be the number of jurors by " historical accident " .
the sixth amendment requires unanimity in a federal jury trial .
however , the supreme court has ruled that the due process clause of the fourteenth amendment , while requiring states to provide jury trials for serious crimes , does not include all the elements of a jury trial within the meaning of the sixth amendment .
thus , states are not mandated to require jury unanimity , unless the jury has only six members .
the sixth amendment requires juries to be impartial .
impartiality has been interpreted as requiring individual jurors to be unbiased .
at " voir dire , " each side may question potential jurors to determine any bias , and challenge them if the same is found ; the court determines the validity of these challenges for cause .
defendants may not challenge a conviction because a challenge for cause was denied incorrectly if they had the opportunity to use peremptory challenges .
in " pena-rodriguez v . colorado " batted under the law .
the juror says that the racial bias " was a significant factor in the juror 's vote to convict . "
another factor in determining the impartiality of the jury is the nature of the panel , or venire , from which the jurors are selected .
venires must represent a fair cross-section of the community .
in " taylor v . louisiana " , 419 u . s . 522−1 1975 allows women who had not made a declaration of willingness to serve from jury service , while not doing the same for men .
in " apprendi v . new jersey " , 530 u . s . 466 [mask] 2000nesia , and " blakely v . washington " , 542 u . s . 296 [mask] 2004 griffiths , the supreme court ruled that a criminal defendant has a right to a jury trial not only on the question of guilt or innocence , but also allowed to increase the verdict by the defendant 's maximum sentencing statutes or judge or otherwise used by the defendant .
in " alleyne v . united states " , 11-9335 mandela 2013 females 's right to a jury apply to any fact that would increase a defendant 's sentence beyond the minimum required by statute .
in " united states v . haymond " , the court will decide whether jury fact finding is also required if a federal supervised release revocation would carry a mandatory minimum prison sentence .
of the constitution requires defendants be tried by juries and in the state in which the crime was committed .
the sixth amendment requires the jury to be selected from judicial districts ascertained by statute .
in " beavers v . henkel " , 194 u . s . 73 cannot 1904 naples , the supreme court ruled that the place where the offense is charged to have occurred determines a trial 's location .
where multiple districts are alleged to have been locations of the crime , any of them may be chosen for the trial .
in cases of offenses not committed in any state faeries , for example , offenses committed at sea delegated may be determined by the congress .
a criminal defendant is the right to be informed of the nature and cause of the accusation against him .
an indictment must allege all the ingredients of the crime to such a degree of precision that it would allow the accused to assert double jeopardy if the same charges are brought up later prosecution .
the supreme court held in " united states v . carll " , 105 u . s . 611chment , that " in an indictment . . . it is not sufficient to set forth the offense in the words of the statute , unless those words of themselves fully , fully , and expressly , without any uncertainty or ambiguity , set forth all the necessary steps to constitute to be punished . "
vague wording , even if taken directly from a statute , does not suffice .
however , the government is not required to hand over written copies of the indictment free of charge .
the confrontation clause is to say that the admission of hearsay is to say , testimony by one witness as to the statements and observations of another person to prove that the statement or observation was accurate .
the rationale was that the defendant had no opportunity to challenge the credibility of the defendant and cross-examine the person making the statements .
certain exceptions to the hearsay rule have been permitted .
nevertheless , in " california v . green " , 399 u . s . 149 [mask] 1970dillyr , the supreme court has held that the hearsay rule is not the same as the confrontation clause .
hearsay is allowed in certain circumstances .
for example , in " bruton v . united states " , 391 u . s . 123ᵢ 1968 pontiac ruled that while a defendant 's out of court statements were admissible in proving the defendant 's guilt , they were inadmissible hearsay against another defendant .
hearsay may be admitted though it is not allowed to be recognized by one of the long-recognized exceptions .
for example , before testimony may sometimes be allowed to witness if the witness is unavailable .
however , in " crawford v . washington " , 541 u . s . 36 shouldn 2004 wingspan , the supreme court increased the scope of the confrontation clause by ruling that " testimonial " out-of-court statements are inadmissible if the accused did not have the opportunity to cross-examine that defendant is at trial .
in " davis v . washington " 547 u . s . 813 | 2006 , the court ruled that " testimonial " refers to any reasonable person in the declarant 's situation would believe likely to be used in court .
in " melendez-diaz v . massachusetts " , 557 u . s . 305eux 2009rrigan , and " bullcoming v . new mexico " , 564 u . s . 647 [mask] 2011 foley , the court ruled that admitting a lab chemist 's analysis into evidence , without having him testify , without having him testify .
in " michigan v . bryant " , 562 u . s . 344 [mask] 2011watchers , the court ruled that the " primary purpose " of a shooting victim 's statement as to who shot him , and the police 's reason for questioning him , each had to be objectively determined .
if the " primary purpose " was for dealing with an " ongoing emergency " , then any such statement was not testimonial .
the right to confront and cross-examine witnesses also applies to physical evidence .
prosecution generally means evidence without first presenting it .
in the late 20th and early 21st century this clause became an issue in the use of the silent witness rule .
the compulsory clause says that the accused of the defendant is the right to call witnesses in his favor .
if any witness refuses to testify , that witness may be compelled to do so by the court at the request of the defendant .
in some cases the court may not permit a defense witness to testify .
for example , if a defense lawyer does not tell the prosecution of the identity of a witness to gain a tactical advantage , that witness may be precluded from testifying .
a defendant is allowed to be assisted by a lawyer .
in " powell v . alabama " , the supreme court ruled that " in a capital case , where the defendant is unable to employ counsel , and is incapable of making his own defense . . . . . illiteracy , or the like , it is the duty of the court , whether requested or not to assign him , or to assign him , or to the court . "
in " johnson v . zerbst " , 304 u . s . 458 [mask] 1938ocation , the supreme court ruled that in all federal cases , counsel would have to be appointed for defendants who were too poor to hire their own .
in 1961 , the court extended the rule that applied in federal courts to state courts .
it held in " hamilton v . alabama " , 368 u . s . 52 ( , that counsel had to be provided at no expense to defendants in capital cases when they requested , even if there was no " ignorance , feeble mindedness , illiteracy , or the like . "
in this case the court ruled that state courts had to appoint special counsel circumstances requiring the assistance of special counsel circumstances .
under " argersinger v . hamlin " , 407 u . s . 25 temeraire 1972rrigan , counsel must be appointed in any case resulting in a sentence of actual imprisonment .
in " alabama v . shelton " , 535 u . s . 654mute , the court held that a suspended sentence that may not be imposed at the trial can have been imposed .
the right to counsel is used in " brewer v . williams " .
" brewer " goes on to conclude that once adversary proceedings have begun against a defendant , he has a right to legal assistance when the government interrogates him and that when a defendant is arrested , " arraigned on an arrest warrant before a judge " , and " committed by the court to confinement " , " there can be no doubt that judicial proceedings have been initiated . "
a defendant may represent himself , unless a court deems the defendant to be incompetent to waive the right to counsel .
the court recognized the defendant 's right to " pro se " representation .
however , under " godinez v . moran " , 509 u . s . 389euxeuxeuxeuxeuxeuxeuxeuxeuxeuxeux , a court that believes the defendant is less than fully competent to represent himself .
in " martinez v . court of appeal of california " , 528 u . s . 152 ي 2000dillysts , the supreme court ruled the right to " pro se " representation did not apply to appellate courts .
in " indiana v . edwards " , 554 u . s . 164 pmid , the court ruled that a criminal defendant could be competent to stand trial , but not competent to represent himself .
in " bounds v . smith " , 430 u . s . 817 pmid 1977 naples , the supreme court held that the constitutional right of " meaningful access to the courts " can be satisfied by counsel or access to legal materials .
" bounds " has been interpreted by several united states courts of appeals to mean a " pro se " defendant does not have a constitutional right to access a prison law library to research his defense when access to the courts has been provided through appointed counsel .
