the role of a gamemaster in a traditional role-playing game is to weave the other players ' player-character stories together , create environments in which the players can interact , and solve any player disputes .
the basic role of the gamemaster is the same in almost all role-playing games .
the role of a gamemaster in an online game is to enforce the game 's rules and provide general customer service .
dave arneson invented the game " blackmoor " in 1971 .
each gaming system has its own name for the role of the gamemaster , such as " judge " , " narrator " , " referee " , " director " , or " storyteller " .
the gamemaster prepares the game session for the players and the characters they playhesis known as player characters or pcs .
the gamemaster also keeps track of non-player characterstocking npcscscscscscscscscscscscscscscscs interact with each other , as well as of the general state of the game world .
the game sessionisanning can be described as a play , in which the players are the lead actors .
gms may choose to run a game based on a published game world , with the maps and history already in place .
a good gamemaster draws the players into the adventure , making it enjoyable for everyone .
gamemasters must also keep game balance :ibly overpowered monsters , or players are no fun .
in 1997 , those who favor their left-brain such as skilled code writers usually do not make it in the ethereal gamemaster world of storytelling and verse .
a gamemaster in such a game is either an experienced volunteer player or an employee of the game 's publisher .
they enforce the game 's rules by banishing spammers , player killers , cheaters , and hackers and by solving players ' problems by providing general customer service .
for their tasks they use special tools and characters that allow them to do things like teleport to players , summon items , and browse logs that record players ' activities .
however , this blame is misdirected as most gms are not developers and cultures resolve those types of problems .
while membership in the online gaming forum had only one real requirement requirement requirement requirement requirement requirement requirement requirement .
" world of warcraft " has employees of blizzard entertainment .
" runescape " has more than 500 moderators working for jagex games .
these " jagex moderators " , as they are called , usually have the word " mod " and a gold crown before their account names which ordinary players can not use .
the game also has " player moderators " and " forum moderators " who are player volunteers helping with moderation .
miniconomy , a smaller text-based mmo , has a team of " federals " , experienced players that help moderate the game and interactions .
" transformice " , an mmorpg , has a team of volunteer moderators called " mods " who are experienced players that help moderate the game and interactions .
note that a few games , notably " neverwinter nights " and " " , are video game adaptations of tabletop role-playing games that are played online with one player acting as a traditional gamemaster .
to ensure proper gamemastering can take place , four components are needed : some kind of sensory system to the game allowing the game masters to know current events , providing dynamic game information ; dynamic and static game information lets game masters make informed decisions ; decisions need to be actuated into the game , either through the game system or through manual .
tabletop gms can not find players interested in either the same setting , product line , or play style in their local neighborhood .
the networked personal computer was a solution in the form of online chat programs .
gamemasters can find players online .
this online chat format significantly changed the balance of duties for a gamemaster .
the gm was likely to need copies of player-character records , being unable to look at the originals as in normal face-to-face procedure .
the format also forced the issue issue issue issue issue issue when participants were not personally acquaintedference of whether to leave all rolling of dice to the gm parapet .
the use of technology to allow online play is growing .
