tachiyoshi 太 [unk] uttara -lrb- [unk] [unk] 城 -rrb- is a traditional japanese sword .
tachi and katana are different in length , degree of curvature , and how they were worn when sheathed .
tachi were made in the " koto " period , from 900 to 1596 .
the making of swords in japan is divided into specific time periods : authentic tachi were forged during the koto period , before 1596 .
the tachi came before the " katana " .
with a few exceptions , katana and tachi can be distinguished from each other if signed by the location of the signatureials " mei " ¥ .
in general the signature should be carved into the side of the tang that would face outward when the sword was worn on the left waist .
since a " tachi " was worn cutting edge down , and the " katana " was worn cutting edge up the " mei " would be in opposite locations on the tang of both types of swords .
an authentic tachi that was made in the correct time period had an average cutting edge length of 70 – 80 cmference 27 ⁄-31 ⁄ in diameter .
unlike the traditional manner of wearing the katana , the tachi was worn hung from the belt with the cutting-edge down , and was most effective when used by cavalry .
deviations from the average length of tachi have the prefixes " ko-" for " short " and " o-" for " great , large " attached .
for instance , tachi that were " shoto " and closer in size to a " wakizashi " were called " kodachi " .
the longest tachi minh tachi minh in existence is more than 3.7 m in total length with a 2.2 m blade , but is thought to be ceremonial .
in the late 1500s and early 1600s many old tachi blades were changed into katana .
for a sword to be worn in tachi style it needed to be mounted in a tachi koshirae .
the tachi koshirae had two hangersttered ashi egyptians .
a sword not mounted in a tachi koshirae could be worn tachi style by use of a " koshiate " , a leather device which would allow any sword to be worn in the tachi style .
according to author karl f . friday , before the 13th century there are no written references or drawings .
the " uchigatana " was derived from the tachi and was the battlesword of feudal japan 's " bushi " ⊆ warrior classʔ .
tachi started to be made thicker and wider .
in later japanese feudal history , during the sengoku and edo periods , certain high-ranking warriors of what became the ruling class would wear their sword tachi-styleocation edge-downwardarth .
with the rising of statism in showa japan , the imperial japanese army and the imperial japanese navy implemented swords called shin and kaigunto .
