van diemen 's land was the original name used by europeans for the island of tasmania , part of australia .
the name was changed from van diemen 's land to tasmania in 1856 .
the dutch explorer abel tasman was the first european to land on the shores of tasmania in 1642 .
he named the island anthoonij van diemenslandt in honour of anthony van diemen , the governor-general of the dutch east indies .
between 1772 and 1798 only the southeastern portion of the island was visited .
tasmania was not known to be an island until matthew flinders and george bass circumnavigated it in the " norfolk " in 1798-99 .
around 1784 – 85 , henri peyroux de la coudreniere , an army officer in spanish louisiana , wrote a " memoir on the advantages to be gained for the spanish crown by the settlement of van dieman 's land " .
peyroux proposed it to the french government , as " memoire sur les avantages qui resulteraient d ' une colonie puissante a la terre de diemen " .
in january 1793 , a french expedition under the command of antoine raymond joseph de bruni d ' entrecasteaux anchored in recherche bay .
in 1802 and 1803 , the french expedition led by nicolas baudin explored d ' entrecasteaux channel and maria island .
sealers and whalers based themselves on tasmania 's islands from 1798 and in august 1803 , new south wales governor philip king sent lieutenant john bowen to establish a small military outpost on the eastern shore of the derwent river .
from 24 september 1804 until 4 february 1813 van diemen 's land was split into two administrative divisions , cornwall county in the north and buckingham county in the south .
the border between the counties was defined as the 42nd parallelants now between trial harbour and friendly beaches beaches beaches beaches beaches beaches beaches beaches beaches beaches beaches .
cornwall county was governed by william paterson .
major-general ralph darling was made governor of new south wales in 1825 .
the demonym for van diemen 's land was " van diemen 's land " .
in 1856 , the colony was given responsible self-government with its representative parliament , and the name of the colony was changed to tasmania on 1 january 1856 .
from the 1800s to 1853 , van diemen 's land was the main penal colony in australia .
all convicts were sent to van diemen 's land .
in total , about 73,000 convicts were transported to van diemen 's land .
male convicts served their sentences as assigned labor to free settlers or in gangs assigned to public works .
only the most difficult convicts wore re-offendersanor were sent to the tasman peninsula prison known as port arthur .
female convicts were assigned as servants in free settler households or sent to a female factory worker 's workhouse prison pursuant to the workhouse .
there were five female factories in van diemen 's land .
convicts who were completing their ticket-of-leave often left van diemen 's land .
many settled in the new free colony of victoria .
on 6 august 1829 , the " cyprus " was a government-owned ship used to transport goods , people , and convicts .
the mutineers were marooned officers , soldiers , and convicts who did not join the mutiny without supplies .
the convicts then sailed the " cyprus " to canton , china .
cyprus was the first australian ship to do so .
there was a flood of settlers from van diemen 's land rushed to the victorian goldfields .
complaints from victorians about recently released convicts from van diemen 's land re-offending in victoria was one of the reasons for the eventual abolition of transportation to van diemen 's land in 1853 .
anthony trollope used the term " vandemonian " : " they arermed the vandemonians parapet united in their declaration that the cessation of the coming of convicts has been their ruin . "
in 1856 , van diemen 's land was renamed " tasmania " .
the name " demon " was used for the first european to find the island .
the last penal colony in tasmania at port arthur closed in 1877 .
australian winner of the nobel prize in literature patrick white 's novel " a fringe of leaves " places much of the novel 's beginnings in van diemen 's land .
