van diemen 's land was the original name used by europeans for the island of tasmania , part of australia .
the name was changed from van diemen 's land to tasmania in 1856 .
the dutch explorer abel tasman was the first european to land on the shores of tasmania in 1642 .
he named the island anthoonij van diemenslandt in honour of anthony van diemen , the governor-general of the dutch east indies .
tasmania was not known to be an island until matthew flinders and george bass circumnavigated it in the " norfolk " in 1798-99 .
around 1784 – 85 , henri peyroux de la coudreniere , an army officer in spanish louisiana , wrote a " memoir on the advantages to be gained for the spanish crown by the settlement of van dieman 's land " .
in 1802 and 1803 , the french expedition led by nicolas baudin explored d ' entrecasteaux channel and maria island .
sealers and whalers based themselves on tasmania 's islands from 1798 and in august 1803 , new south wales governor philip king sent lieutenant john bowen to establish a small military outpost on the eastern shore of the derwent river .
from 24 september 1804 until 4 february 1813 van diemen 's land was split into two administrative divisions , cornwall county in the north and buckingham county in the south .
major-general ralph darling was made governor of new south wales in 1825 .
the demonym for van diemen 's land was " van diemen 's land " .
in 1856 , the colony was given responsible self-government with its representative parliament , and the name of the colony was changed to tasmania on 1 january 1856 .
from the 1800s to 1853 , van diemen 's land was the main penal colony in australia .
male convicts served their sentences as assigned labor to free settlers or in gangs assigned to public works .
only the most difficult convicts wore re-offendersanor were sent to the tasman peninsula prison known as port arthur .
many settled in the new free colony of victoria .
the mutineers were marooned officers , soldiers , and convicts who did not join the mutiny without supplies .
there was a flood of settlers from van diemen 's land rushed to the victorian goldfields .
complaints from victorians about recently released convicts from van diemen 's land re-offending in victoria was one of the reasons for the eventual abolition of transportation to van diemen 's land in 1853 .
anthony trollope used the term " vandemonian " : " they arermed the vandemonians parapet united in their declaration that the cessation of the coming of convicts has been their ruin . "
the name " demon " was used for the first european to find the island .
the last penal colony in tasmania at port arthur closed in 1877 .
australian winner of the nobel prize in literature patrick white 's novel " a fringe of leaves " places much of the novel 's beginnings in van diemen 's land .