romania ( ; ) is a country in southeastern europe .
it is the 12th largest country in the european union .
the river danube is the second longest river in germany .
the mountains cross romania from the north to the southwest .
it was formed in 1859 by a personal union of moldavia and wallachia .
after world war i , romania fought on the side of the allied powers starting with 1916 , bukovina , bessarabia , transylvania and parts of banat , crisana , and maramures became part of the kingdom of romania .
in june 1940 , because of the molotov – ribbentrop pact and second vienna award , romania was made into the soviet union , and northern transylvania to hungary .
in november 1940 , romania signed the tripartite pact .
after the war , romania became a socialist republic and member of the warsaw pact .
after the 1989 revolution , romania began to change its economy .
following rapid economic growth in the early 2000s , romania has an economy mainly based on services , and is a producer and net exporter of machines and electric energy .
most of the population identifies themselves as eastern orthodox christians .
the oldest known document written in romanian is the letter of neacsu from campulung .
two spelling forms were used interchangeably until sociolinguistic developments in the late 17th century .
the use of the name " romania " to refer to the common homeland of all romanians — its modern-day meaning — was first documented in the early 19th century .
human remains found in pestera cu oase aarhus cave with bones , radiocarbon dated as being from about 40,000 years ago , represent the oldest known " homo sapiens " in europe .
neolithic techniques and agriculture spread after the arrival of a mixed group of people from thessaly in the 6th millennium bc .
excavations near a salt spring at lunca yielded the earliest evidence for salt exploitation in europe ; here the production of salt started between 6050 and 5900 bc .
among the native peoples , herodotus listed the getae of the lower danube region , the agathyrsi of transylvania and the syginnae of the plains along the river tisza at the beginning of the 5th century bc .
strabo associated the getae with the dacians who dominated the lands along the southern carpathian mountains in the 1st century bc .
he also conquered the greek colonies in dobruja and the neighboring peoples as far as the balkan mountains between 55 and 44 bc .
he resisted the romans for decades , but the roman army had fewer troops .
emperor trajan transformed banat , oltenia and the greater part of transylvania into the new roman province of dacia .
the romans pursued an organized colonization policy and the provincials enjoyed a long period of peace and prosperity in the 2nd century .
emperor aurelian ordered the evacuation of the province of dacia trajana in 271 ad .
the romans did not abandon their fortresses along the northern banks of the lower danube for decades .
the goths were expanding towards the lower danube from the 230s , forcing the native peoples to flee to the roman empire or to accept their suzerainty .
the goths ' rule came to an abrupt end when the huns invaded their territory in 376 , causing new waves of migrations .
the huns forced the remnants of the local population into submission , but their empire collapsed in 454 .
the bulgars occupied the danube region in 680 .
the romanians ' ancestors lived in densely forested areas , separated from the goths , huns , gepids and avars during these centuries .
place names of slavic origin abound in romania .
after the avar khaganate collapsed in the 790s , bulgaria became the dominant power of the region .
the magyarssive – hungarians hungariansinger took control of the steppes north of the lower danube in the 830s , but the bulgarians and the pechenegs decided to leave this region for the lowlands along the middle danube around 894 .
the gesta hungarorum wrote about the invading magyars ' wars against three dukesglad , menumorut and the vlach geloufor banat , crisana and transylvania .
byzantine missionaries lived in the lands east of the tisa from the 940s .
stephen i of hungary , the first king of hungary , took over the local chieftains .
the cumans and vlachs against the byzantine empire started in the 11th century .
they established the romanians ' presence in the lands to the north of the lower danube .
the szekelysa community of free warriors moved in central transylvania around 1100 .
colonists from the holy roman empire , the transylvanian saxons ' ancestorscame to the province in the 1150s .
a high-ranking royal official , styled voivode , ruled the transylvanian counties from the 1170s .
vlachs ' land was first mentioned in southern transylvania in the early 13th century .
papal correspondence mentioned the activities of orthodox prelates among the romanians in muntenia in the 1230s .
the mongols ' golden horde emerged as the dominant power of eastern europe , but bela iv of hungary 's land grant to the knights hospitallers in oltenia and muntenia shows that the local vlach rulers were subject to the king 's authority in 1247 .
the city of wallachia was founded in 1310 by the romanians .
he defeated the hungarian royal army in the battle of posada .
the second romanian principality , moldavia , achieved full autonomy during the reign of bogdan i around 1360 .
a local dynasty ruled the despotate of dobruja in the second half of the 14th century , but the ottoman empire took possession of the territory after 1388 .
the princes of the house of kiev and vlad iii of wallachia , and stephen iii of moldavia defended their countries independence against the ottomans .
the hungarian nobles and the heads of the saxon and szekely communities were the ones who supported the revolt .
the formal alliance of the hungarian , saxon and szekely leaders , known as the union of the three nations , became an important part of the self-government of transylvania .
transylvania and maramures became a new state in the ottoman empire .
the romanians ' orthodox faith remained only tolerated , although they made up more than one-third of the population , according to 17th-century estimations .
the princes of transylvania , wallachia and moldavia joined the holy league against the ottoman empire in 1594 .
the wallachian prince , michael the brave , united the three principalities in his rule in 1600 .
the neighboring powers forced him to abdicate in september , but he became a symbol of the unification of the romanian lands in the 19th century .
the ottomans were the most talented princes , the most talented princesgabriel bethlen of transylvania , matei basarab of wallachia , and vasile lupu of moldaviastrengthened their autonomy .
the united armies of the holy league expelled the ottoman troops from central europe between 1684 and 1699 .
the organization of the transylvanian military frontier caused more disturbances , especially among the szekelys in 1764 .
princes dimitrie cantemir of moldavia and constantin brancoveanu of wallachia concluded alliances with the habsburg monarchy and russia against the ottomans , but they were dethroned in 1711 and 1714 respectively .
the sultans lost confidence in the native princes .
the borders of the habsburg monarchy took control of the western part of moldavia , or bucovina , in 1775 , and the russian empire took the eastern half of moldavia , or bessarabia , in 1812 .
a census showed that the romanians were more numerous than any other ethnic groups in transylvania in 1733 .
the uniate bishop , inocentiu micu-klein , demanded the recognition of the romanians as the fourth privileged nation was forced into exile .
the king and the local authorities denied to grant their requests .
taking advantage of the greek war of independence , a wallachian lesser nobleman , tudor vladimirescu , stirred up a revolt against the ottomans in january 1821 , but he was murdered in june by phanariot greeks .
after a new russo-turkish war , the treaty of adrianople strengthened the autonomy of the danubian principalities in 1829 , although it also acknowledged the sultan 's right to confirm the election of the princes .
mihail kogalniceanu , nicolae balcescu and other leaders of the 1848 revolutions in moldavia and wallachia demanded the freedom of the peasants and the union of the two principalities , but russian and ottoman troops crushed their revolt .
in transylvania , most romanians supported the imperial government against the hungarian revolutioners after the diet passed a law about the union of transylvania and hungary .
the central government refused to change the internal frontiers .
in 1856 , the treaty of paris made the danubian principalities in the empire .
after special assemblies convoked in moldavia and wallachia urged the unification of the two principalities , the great powers did not prevent alexandru ioan cuza as their collective " domnitor "dorkovsky or ruling prince assent in january 1859 .
the united kingdom adopted the name romania in february 1862 .
cuza 's government carried out a series of reforms , including the secularization of the property of monasteries and agrarian reform , but a coalition of conservative and radical politicians forced him to abdicate in february 1866 .
the parliament of romania voted in the same year .
the great powers said that romania was independent from the congress of berlin and carol i was crowned king in 1881 .
the congress also gave the danube delta and dobruja to romania .
although romanian scholars tried to unite all romanians into a greater romania , the government did not openly support their irredentist projects .
the leaders of the romanian national party proposed the federalization of austria-hungary and the romanian intellectuals established cultural association to promote the use of romanian .
fearing of russian expansionism , romania secretly joined the triple alliance of germany , austria-hungary and italy in 1883 , but public opinion remained hostile to austria-hungary .
it brought about a lot of peace between romania and the triple entente of france , russia and the united kingdom .
the country remained neutral when world war i started negotiations with the entente powers .
after the war of 1916 , romania entered the war against the central powers .
the german and austrian troops defeated the romanian army and occupied three-quarters of the country by early 1917 .
after the october revolution , russia was forced to sign a harsh peace treaty with the central powers in may 1918 .
king ferdinand gathered the romanian army on behalf of the entente powers a day before germany surrendered on 11 november 1918 .
the union of the province was formed on 28 november 1918 .
peace treaties with austria , bulgaria and hungary made the new borders in 1919 and 1920 , but the soviet union did not acknowledge the loss of bessarabia .
a new electoral system gave voting rights to all adult male citizens .
calypso botez established the national council of romanian women to promote feminist ideas .
the national liberal party and the national peasants ' party were the leaders of the political party .
the democratic parties were squeezed between conflicts with the fascist and anti-semitic iron guard and the authoritarian tendencies of king carol ii .
the king created a new constitution and dissolved the political parties in 1938 , replacing the parliamentary system with a royal dictatorship .
the two countries decided that the two countries would make a treaty about the coordination of their economic policies in 1939 .
after the territorial losses , the king was forced to abdicate in favor of his minor son , michael i , on 6 september , and romania was turned into a national-legionary state under the leadership of general ionescu .
the pact was signed on 23 november .
the iron guard staged a coup against antonescu , but he crushed the riot with german support and introduced a military dictatorship in early 1941 .
after the german occupation of hungary in march 1944 , about 132,000 hungarian jews were deported to extermination camps from northern transylvania with the hungarian authorities ' support .
after the soviet victory in the battle of stalingrad in 1943 , iuliu maniu , a leader of the opposition to antonescu , entered into secret negotiations with british diplomats who made it clear that romania had to seek peace with the soviet union .
the national liberal and national peasants ' parties established the national democratic bloc .
after a successful soviet attack , the young king michael i ordered the arrest of antonescu and appointed politicians from the national democratic bloc to form a new government on 23 august 1944 .
the red army 's military campaign against hungary and germany , but joseph stalin regarded the country as an occupied territory .
stalin 's deputy was made by stalin to be the prime minister .
in february 1947 , the paris peace treaties confirmed that transylvania was returned to romania .
during the soviet occupation of romania , the government called for new elections in 1946 .
gheorghe gheorghiu-dej escaped in 1944 to become romania 's first communist leader .
in 1947 he and others forced king michael i to abdicate and leave romania .
romania remained under direct military occupation and economic control of the ussr until the late 1950s .
in 1948 , the state began to nationalize private firms and to collectivize agriculture .
during this period , the regime launched several campaigns of purges in which numerous " enemies of the state " and " parasite elements " were targeted for different forms of punishment , such as deportation , internal exile , and internment in forced labour camps and prisons , sometimes for life , as well as extrajudicial killing .
a 2006 group estimated the number of direct victims of the communist repression at two million people .
in 1965 , nicolae ceausescu came to power and started to conduct the foreign policy more independently from the soviet union .
it was also the only secret diplomatic state to keep peace with the west and the same day that the soviet union had been in .
the influence of international financial organizations included the imf and the world bankbank grew , and different from ceausescu 's autocratic rule .
the process was replaced in repaying all foreign government debt of romania in 1989 .
at the same time , ceausescu greatly extended the authority of the securitate secret police and imposed a severe cult of personality .
after the 1989 revolution , the national salvation front seized some of the party 's democratic and free market measures .
in april 1990 , a sit-in protest contesting the results of the elections and accusing the nsf , including iliescu , of being made up of former communists and members of the securitate – rapidly grew to become what was called the golaniad .
the party split up several political parties , including the social democratic party and the democratic party .
the former governed romania from 1990 until 1996 .
in november 2014 , sibiu mayor klaus johannis was elected president unexpectedly defeating former prime minister victor ponta , who had been in the lead in the opinion polls .
the post-1989 period is also characterized by the fact that most of the former industrial and economic enterprises which were built and operated during the communist period have been closed .
in november 2015 , massive anti-corruption protests which developed in the wake of the colectiv nightclub fire led to the resignation of romanian prime minister victor ponta .
during 2017 – 2018 , in response to measures which were perceived to weaken the fight against corruption , some of the biggest protests since 1989 took place in romania , with over 500,000 people protesting across the country .
after the cold war , romania became closer friends with western europe and the united states .
the country became an associated state of the european union in 1995 , an acceding country in 2004 , and a member on 1 january 2007 .
this has been followed by a significant improvement in living standards as the country successfully reduced internal poverty and established a functional democratic state .
this led to a large gross domestic product contraction and budget deficit in 2009 .
near the end of 2013 , the economist reported romania again enjoying ' booming ' economic growth at 4.1 % that year , with wages rising fast and a lower unemployment than in britain .
many romanians emigrated to europe and north america , with particularly large communities in italy and spain .
it is the twelfth-largest country in europe .
the carpathian mountains are the center of romania .
the mountains are surrounded by the moldavian and transylvanian plateaus and carpathian basin and wallachian plains .
about 47 % of the country 's land area is covered with natural and semi-natural ecosystems .
it forms the danube delta , which is the second largest delta in europe .
it is 5800 km2 , the largest continuous marshland in europe .
23 have been declared natural monuments , 74 missing , 39 endangered , 171 vulnerable , and 1,253 rare .
it is mostly in the temperate and continental seasons .
the average temperature is 11 ° in the south and 8 choirs in the north .
in summer , average maximum temperatures in bucharest rise to 28color .
the highest rainfall is around 750 mm .
in the western parts of the country , the climate is milder and has some mediterranean influences .
in dobruja , the black sea is also an influence over the region 's climate .
the constitution of romania is based on the constitution of france 's fifth republic .
the country is governed on the basis of a multi-party democratic system .
the prime minister is elected by the people of the united kingdom , and is elected by the people of the republic of ireland .
the high court of cassation and justice is the supreme court of romania .
the romanian judicial system is strongly influenced by the french model .
the constitutional court shall also be amended through a public referendum .
the 2007 entry into the eu has been a significant influence on its domestic policy , and including judicial reforms , increased judicial cooperation with other member states , and measures to combat corruption .
since december 1989 , romania has pursued a policy of strengthening relations with the west in general , more specifically with the united states and the european union .
it joined the north atlantic treaty organizationstered natowoman on 29 march 2004 , the european union parapet eurasia on 1 january 2007 , while it had joined the world bank in 1972 , and is a founding member of the world trade organization .
past recent governments say that one of their goals is to strengthen ties with and helping other countriesocksocksocksocksocks in particular moldova , ukraine , and georgia interact with the process of integration with the rest of the west .
romania supports nato and eu membership for the democratic former soviet republics in eastern europe and the caucasus .
because it has a large minority of people , romania has also developed strong relations with hungary .
the european union was approved by the european parliament in june 2011 .
as of august 2019 , its acceptance into the schengen area is not limited because the european council has misgivings about romania 's adherence to the rule of law , a fundamental principle of eu membership .
in december 2005 , president traian basescu and united states secretary of state condoleezza rice signed an agreement that would allow u . s . military presence at several romanian facilities primarily in the eastern part of the country .
in may 2009 , hillary clinton , us secretary of state , said that " romania is one of the most trustworthy and respectable partners of the usa . "
relations with moldova are a special case .
a movement for unification of romania and moldova appeared in the early 1990s after both countries achieved emancipation from communist rule .
relations between the two countries have improved .
the romanian army is made up of land , air , and naval forces .
romanian troops participated in the occupation of iraq .
in december 2011 , the romanian senate agreed to the draft law that the united states agreed to make the treaty of romania .
each county is administered by a county council .
the prefect is appointed by the central government .
it is further divided into six sectors .
the cities and communes are the nuts-5 level divisions , but there are no current nuts-4 level divisions .
the nuts-1 ono ono ono ono ono four macroregions aarhus and nuts-2 eruptions have no administrative capacity .
according to eurostat , romania 's gdp per capitaials ppsncies were at 64 % of the eu average in 2007 .
after 1989 the country experienced a decade of economic instability and decline .
from 2000 onwards , the romanian economy was changed into one of relative macroeconomic stability .
in 2006 , the romanian statistics office said that gdp growth in real terms was 7.7 % , one of the highest rates in europe .
unemployment in romania is at 4.3 % in august 2018 .
exports have increased substantially in the past few years , with a 13 % annual rise in exports in 2010 .
trade is mainly centered around the member states of the european union , with germany and italy being the country 's single largest trading partners .
after a series of privatizations and reforms in the late 1990s and 2000s , government intervention in the romanian economy is somewhat lower than in other european economies .
in 2005 , the government replaced romania 's progressive tax system with a flat tax of 16 % for both personal income and corporate profit , among the lowest rates in the european union .
the economy is mainly based on services , which account for 51 % of gdp , even though industry and agriculture also have significant contributions , making up 36 % and 13 % of gdp respectively .
30 % of the romanian population was employed in 2006 in agriculture and primary production , one of the highest rates in europe .
they scored lower than other countries in the region such as the czech republic .
in 2018 , the external debt of romania was reported to be at the sum of €96 billion according to the national bank of romania .
rail transport experienced a dramatic decline after 1989 , and was estimated at 99 million passenger journeys in 2004 .
romania is a net exporter of electrical energy and is 48th worldwide in terms of consumption of electric energy .
it has one of the largest refining capacities in eastern europe .
it is looking to further expand its nuclear power plant at cernavoda .
according to bloomberg , in 2013 romania ranked 5th in the world , and according to " the independent " , it ranks number one in europe at internet speeds , with timisoara ranked among the highest in the world .
according to the world travel and tourism council , romania is estimated to be the fourth-fastest-growing travel and tourism total demand in the world , with an estimated potential growth of 8 % per year from 2007 to 2016 .
the number of tourists has been steadily rising , reaching 9.33 million foreign tourists in 2016 , according to the worldbank .
bran castle , near brasov , is one of the most famous attractions in romania .
it is targeted to promote such sites as bran and its dracula 's castle , the painted churches of northern moldavia , and the wooden churches of maramures , or the villages with fortified churches in transylvania .
in 2014 , romania had 32,500 companies .
during the 1990s and 2000s , the development of research was hampered by several factors , including corruption , low funding and a considerable brain drain .
in recent years , romania has ranked the lowest or second-lowest in the european union by research and development spending as a percentage of gdp .
in 2018 , romania lost its voting rights in the esa due to a failure to pay 56.8 million euros in membership contributions to the agency .
in the early 2010s , situation for science in romania was characterized as " rapidly improving " .
in january 2011 , the parliament passed a law that enforces strict quality control on universities .
the european union 's proposed extreme light infrastructure exceeds eliminate laser will be built in romania .
in early 2012 , romania launched its first satellite from the centre spatial guyanais in french guyana .
since december 2014 , romania is a co-owner of the international space station .
like other countries in the region , its population is expected to gradually decline in the coming years as a result of sub-replacement fertility rates and negative net migration rate .
the total fertility rate is estimated at 1.36 children born per woman , which is below the replacement rate of 2.1 .
the official language is romanian , a romance language which is the most widely spoken of the eastern romance branchtorts .
romanian is spoken as a first language by approximately 90 % of the entire population .
people who live in romania have access to justice and education in their language .
english is spoken by 31 % of romanians , french is spoken by 17 % , as well as italian and german , each by 7 % .
romania is a secular state .
195,569 people belong to other christian denominations or have another religion .
39,660 people have no religion or are atheist .
it is in the territories of romania and moldova .
although 54.0 % of the population lived in urban areas in 2011 , this percentage has been declining since 1996 .
counties with over 2 liter urban population are hunedoara , brasov and constanta .
its larger urban zone has a population of almost 2.2 million .
since the romanian revolution of 1989 , the romanian educational system has been in a continuous process of reform that has received mixed criticism .
there also a private tutoring system used during secondary school .
ciprian manolescu managed to write a perfect paper depicting gold medal more times than anybody else in the history of the competition .
romania has a basic health care system .
it covers medical examinations , any surgical interventions , and any post-operator medical care .
the topic of the origin of the romanians began to be discussed by the end of the 18th century .
several writers rose to prominence in the 19th century , including george cosbuc , ioan slavici , mihail kogalniceanu , vasile alecsandri , ion luca caragiale , ion creanga , and mihainescu .
the george enescu festival is in bucharest , romania .
contemporary musicians like angela gheorghiu , gheorghe zamfir , inna , alexandra stan and many others have achieved many international acclaim .
in 2013 , calin peter netzer won the golden bear .
the list of world heritage sites includes six cultural sites in romania .
there are twelve public holidays , including the great union day .
the traditional romanian dress that otherwise has fallen out of use during the 20th century , is a popular ceremonial vestment worn on these festivities , especially in the rural areas .
romanian cuisine has been influenced by austrian and german cuisine biennials .
the romania national football team played its first match in 1922 .
it reached the quarter-finals of the 1994 fifa world cup .
the most successful club is steaua bucuresti , who were the first eastern european team to win the champions league in 1986 .
she won the french open in 1978 , and was runner-up in 1980 .
she won the doubles final in the doubles final in the doubles final .
in professional boxing , romania has produced many world champions across the weight divisions internationally recognized by the governing bodies .
it has been one of the more successful countries at the summer olympic games .
nadia comaneci became the first gymnast to score a perfect ten in an olympic event at the 1976 summer olympics .
