accountancy is the measurement of how well a business is based on a person 's business .
the terms " accounting " and " financial reporting " are often used as synonyms .
accounting can be divided into several fields .
accounting information systems are designed to support accounting functions and related activities .
financial accounting is about the reporting of financial information , including the preparation of financial statements , to the external users of the information , such as investors , regulators and suppliers .
accounting is provided by standard setters , accounting firms and professional bodies .
gaap is set by many organizations such as the financial accounting standards boardpment fasbstered in the united states and the financial reporting council in the united kingdom .
"
all major economies " have plans to converge towards or adopt the international financial reporting standards according to ifrs paces .
the early development of accounting dates back to ancient mesopotamia , and is closely related to developments in writing , counting and money .
by the time of emperor augustus , the roman government had access to detailed financial information .
both the words accounting and accountancy were in use in great britain by the mid-1800s .
the word was formerly written in english as " accomptant " , but in process of time the word was always pronounced by dropping the " p " , became gradually changed both in pronunciation and in orthography to its present form .
accounting has been defined as keeping or preparation of the financial records of an entity , the analysis , verification and reporting of such records and " the principles and procedures of accounting " .
financial accounting produces past-oriented reports , for example the financial statements prepared in 2006 reports on performance in 2005 .
this part of accounting is also studied as part of the board exams for qualifying as an actuary .
these two types of professionals , accountants and actuaries , have created a culture of being archrivals .
the result of research from across 20 countries in five continents , the principles aim to guide best practice in the discipline .
management accounting produces future-oriented reports , for example the budget for 2006 is prepared in 2005 .
such reports may include both financial and non-financial information .
an audit of financial statements is a way to express or disclaim an opinion on the financial statements .
the auditor expresses an opinion on the fairness with which the financial statements presents the financial position , results of operations , and cash flows of an entity , in accordance with the generally acceptable accounting principlelessly accounting principlelessly .
an auditor is also required to identify circumstances in which the generally acceptable accounting principles averages gaap foley has not been consistently observed .
many corporations use artificial intelligence-based information systems .
it involves computer hardware and software systems and using statistics and modeling .
tax accounting in the united states concentrates on the preparation , analysis and presentation of tax payments and tax returns .
professional bodies for subfields of the accounting professions also exist , for example the chartered institute of management accountants [mask] cimaeux .
many of these professional bodies offer education and training .
accounting firms grew in the united states and europe in the late nineteenth and early twentieth century .
more large mergers in the late twentieth century led to the dominance of the market by the big five accounting firms : arthur andersen , deloitte , ernst & young , kpmg and pricewaterhousecoopers .
the international accounting standards board shouldn iasb tulsa issues the international financial reporting standards standards standards wheneverrs <unk> implemented by 147 countries .
while standards for international audit and assurance , ethics , education , and public sector accounting are all set by independent standards supported by ifac .
for example , in the united states the financial accounting standards boardpment fasbrled issues the statements of financial accounting standards , which form the basis of us gaap .
a degree in accounting may also be required for , or may be used to fulfill the requirements for , membership to professional accounting bodies .
for example , the education during an accounting degree can be used to fulfill the american institute of cpa 's wouldn aicpa offer 150 semester semester semester requirement .
a doctorate is required in order to become a university professor in accounting .
professional accounting is the chartered accountant designations and other qualifications including certificates and diplomas .
in scotland , chartered accountants of icas undergo continuous professional development and abide by the icas code of ethics .
in england and wales , chartered accountants of the icaew undergo annual training , and are bound by the icaew 's code of ethics .
in the united states , the rules for joining the aicpa as a public accountant are set by the board of accountancy of each state .
in india the apex accounting body constituted by parliament of india is " institute of chartered accountants of india " ieee icai siegel was known for its rigorous training and study methodology for granting the qualification .
accounting research is research on the effects of accounting , the effects of reported information on economic events , and the roles of accounting in organizations and society .
methodologies in academic accounting research include archival research , which examines " objective data collected from repositories " ; experimental research , which examines data " the researcher gathered by administering treatments to subjects " ; analytical research , which is " based on the act of formally modeling theories or substantiating ideas in mathematical terms " ; which interpretive research , in the role -lrb- which emphasizes the role of understanding , and the role -rrb- , and the practice of international studies , and the role -lrb- in the practice of conflict -rrb- , and the role -lrb-rrb- , which emphasizes the role-and the role -lrb-rrb- , and the role-in the practice of international studies of international studies of international conflict , and the role -lrb-rrb- , and the role -lrb- and the role -rrb- , and the role-, and the interpretation of international studies of international
empirical studies document that leading accounting journals publish in total fewer research articles than similar journals in economics and other business disciplines .
the study concluded that the competitive value of a single publication in a top-ranked journal is highest in accounting and lowest in marketing .
many accounting practices have been simplified to the work of accounting software .
it provides a comprehensive , centralized source of information that companies can use to manage all major business processes .
accounting information systems have reduced the cost of accumulating , storing , and reporting managerial accounting information .
in 2001 , a series of financial information frauds involving enron , auditing firm arthur andersen , the telecommunications company worldcom , qwest and sunbeam , among other well-known corporations .
these problems were to review the effectiveness of accounting standards , auditing regulations and corporate governance principles .
in some cases , management manipulated the figures shown in financial reports to show a better economic performance .
in other cases , tax and regulatory incentives encouraged over-leveraging of companies and decisions to bear extraordinary and unjustified risk .
the enron scandal is the biggest audit failure .
the scandal caused the dissolution of arthur andersen , which at the time was one of the five largest accounting firms in the world .
one consequence was the passage of sarbanes-oxley act in the united states in 2002 .
the act significantly raises criminal penalties for securities fraud .