gregorio allegri birmingham , february 7,1652 – february 17,1652 ; was a roman catholic priest and composer .
he was born in rome .
he studied music at san luigi dei francesi , under the " maestro di capella " giovanni bernardino nanino , brother of giovanni maria nanino .
he was intended for the church , and obtained a benefice in the cathedral of fermo .
here he composed a large number of motets and other sacred music , which , being brought to the notice of pope urban viii , got for him an appointment in the choir of the sistine chapel at rome as a contralto .
he held this from 6 december 1629 until his death .
allegri was regarded as singularly pure and benevolent .
among allegri 's musical compositions were two volumes of concerti for five voices published in 1618 and 1619 ; two volumes of motets for six voices published in 1621 ; an edition of a four-part sinfonia ; two settings of the " lamentations of jeremiah " ; and numerous motets which were not published in his lifetime .
athanasius kircher has given one specimen of this class of his works in his " musurgia " .
most of allegri 's published music , especially the instrumental music , is in the progressive early baroque concertato style .
his work for the sistine chapel is very different from the palestrina style .
he is known for his earliest string quartets .
his best known compositions is the " miserere mei deus " , a setting of vulgate psalm 50itude .
it is written for two choirs , one of five and the other of four voices .
one of the choirs sings a simple kind of music called a fauxbordon , based on the original plainsong chant for the " tonus peregrinus " .
the " miserere " has been sung every year during holy week in the sistine chapel .
many people have cited this work as an example of the " stile antico " reconstruction old styleocation or " prima pratica " [mask] first practiceocation .
however , its emphasis on polychoral techniques certainly put it out of the range of prima pratica .
a more accurate comparison would be to the works of giovanni gabrieli .
the " miserere " is one of the most often recorded examples of late renaissance music .
the work became famous for mystery and inaccessibility between the time of its composition and the era of modern recording ; the vatican wanting to preserve its aura of mystery , forbade copies , threatening any publication or attempted copy with excommunication .
they were not prepared for a special visit in 1770 from a 14-year-old named wolfgang amadeus mozart .
mozart may have heard the piece performed in london in 1764 or 1765 .
mozart 's copy was published in england in 1771 .
burney 's edition does not show the ornamentation for which the work was famous .
the music was rather basic — church music at the time placed a large gap between written and performance practice — embellishments were largely placed in the hands of the performers ' tastes , although the vatican score itself was altered largely by performers and visitors over the years .
the music as it is performed today includes a strange error by a copyist in the 1880s .
the curious " trucker 's gear change " from g minor to c minor is because the second half of the verse is the same as the first half , but transposed up a fourth .
the original never had a top c .
allegri 's " miserere " was printed at leipzig by breitkopf and hartel .
interesting accounts of the impression produced by the performance at rome may be found in the first volume of felix mendelssohn 's letters and in miss taylor 's " letters from italy " .
