a cookie is a sweet dessert made from flour .
it contains flour , sugar and some type of oil .
it may include other ingredients such as raisins , oats , chocolate chips , nuts , and chocolate chips .
in most english-speaking countries , such as the united states and canada , cookies are called biscuits .
cookies are sometimes called chewier biscuits .
some cookies may also be named by their shape , such as date squares or bars .
cookies are made in factories .
biscuit or cookie variants include sandwich biscuits , custard creams , jammie dodgers , bourbons and oreos , with marshmallow or jam filling and sometimes dipped in chocolate or another sweet coating .
cookies are usually served with drinks such as milk , coffee or tea .
factory-made cookies are sold in grocery stores , convenience stores and vending machines .
fresh-baked cookies are sold at bakeries and coffee houses .
in most english-speaking countries outside of north america , the most common word for a crisp cookie is biscuit .
cookie is normally used to describe chewier ones .
however , in many regions both terms are used .
in scotland the term cookie is sometimes used to describe a plain bun .
cookies that are baked as a solid layer on a sheet pan and then cut , rather than being baked as individual pieces , are called in british english bar cookies or traybakes .
its american name came from the dutch word " koekje " or " koekie " which means " little cake " .
the scottish national dictionary says that the scottish name is from the diminutive formference + suffix "-ie " -lrb- ie -rrb- suffix "-ie " -lrb- e . g . -rrb- " cooky " or " cucum " ccturing kie " .
it also gives an alternate etymology : like the american word , from the dutch " koekje " , the diminutive of " koek " , a cake .
there was much trade and cultural contact across the north sea between the low countries and scotland during the middle ages .
cookies are most commonly baked until crisp or just long enough that they remain soft , but some kinds of cookies are not baked at all .
cookies are made in many different types of cooking .
the softness of the cookie may depend on how long it is baked .
cookies may be explained by a theory of cookies .
despite its descent from cakes and other sweetened breads , the cookie in almost all its forms has abandoned water for cohesion .
water in cakes make the base cake cake cake called " batter "tively as thin as possible .
in cookies , the agent of cohesion has become some form of oil .
oils , whether they be in the form of butter , vegetable oils , or lard , are much more viscous than water and evaporate freely at a much higher temperature than water .
a cake made with butter or eggs instead of water is much dense when the oven is removed .
oils in baked cakes do not behave as soda tends to in the finished result .
instead of evaporating and thickening the mixture , they remain , saturating the bubbles of escaped gases from what little water there might have been in the eggs , if added , and the carbon dioxide released by heating the baking powder .
it produces the most texturally attractive feature of the cookie .
hard wafers have existed for as long as baking existed .
cookies were made in 7th century ad persia , shortly after the use of sugar became common in the region .
they spread to europe through the muslim conquests of spain .
by the 14th century , they were common in all parts of europe , from royal cuisine to street sellers .
with global travel becoming common at that time , cookies made a natural companion .
one of the most popular early cookies was the jumble , a hard cookie made mostly from nuts , sweetener , and water .
cookies came to america in the late 1620s .
the dutch word " koekje " was first used in the netherlands as a cookie .
the earliest reference to cookies in america is in 1703 .
the most common cookie , given its style by the creaming of butter and sugar , was not common until the 18th century .
cookies are described according to how they are formed .
