in most english-speaking countries , such as the united states and canada , cookies are called biscuits .
some cookies may also be named by their shape , such as date squares or bars .
biscuit or cookie variants include sandwich biscuits , custard creams , jammie dodgers , bourbons and oreos , with marshmallow or jam filling and sometimes dipped in chocolate or another sweet coating .
cookies are usually served with drinks such as milk , coffee or tea .
in most english-speaking countries outside of north america , the most common word for a crisp cookie is biscuit .
cookie is normally used to describe chewier ones .
in scotland the term cookie is sometimes used to describe a plain bun .
cookies that are baked as a solid layer on a sheet pan and then cut , rather than being baked as individual pieces , are called in british english bar cookies or traybakes .
it also gives an alternate etymology : like the american word , from the dutch " koekje " , the diminutive of " koek " , a cake .
there was much trade and cultural contact across the north sea between the low countries and scotland during the middle ages .
cookies are most commonly baked until crisp or just long enough that they remain soft , but some kinds of cookies are not baked at all .
despite its descent from cakes and other sweetened breads , the cookie in almost all its forms has abandoned water for cohesion .
in cookies , the agent of cohesion has become some form of oil .
oils , whether they be in the form of butter , vegetable oils , or lard , are much more viscous than water and evaporate freely at a much higher temperature than water .
a cake made with butter or eggs instead of water is much dense when the oven is removed .
oils in baked cakes do not behave as soda tends to in the finished result .
instead of evaporating and thickening the mixture , they remain , saturating the bubbles of escaped gases from what little water there might have been in the eggs , if added , and the carbon dioxide released by heating the baking powder .
cookies were made in 7th century ad persia , shortly after the use of sugar became common in the region .
by the 14th century , they were common in all parts of europe , from royal cuisine to street sellers .
one of the most popular early cookies was the jumble , a hard cookie made mostly from nuts , sweetener , and water .
the dutch word " koekje " was first used in the netherlands as a cookie .
the earliest reference to cookies in america is in 1703 .
the most common cookie , given its style by the creaming of butter and sugar , was not common until the 18th century .