salts are composed of related numbers of cations ligue positively charged ions percival and anionsttered negative ions percival .
salts can be used to treat people .
neutral salts are salts that are neither acidic nor basic .
examples of zwitterions include amino acids , many metabolites , peptides , and proteins .
sodium chloride is used in the film .
in many cases the apparent opacity or transparency is related to the difference in size of the individual monocrystals .
since light reflects from the grain boundaries between crystallites atoms atoms , larger crystals tend to be transparent , while the polycrystalline aggregates look like white powders .
inorganic pigments tend not to be salts , because insolubility is necessary for fastness .
some organic dyes are salts , but they are virtually insoluble in water .
different salts can elicit all five basic tastes , e . g . , salty dq sodium chloride chloride chloride chloride chloride chloride chloride chloride chloride chloride chloride chloride chloride chloride chloride chloride chloride chloride chloride ¥ , which will cause lead poisoning if ingestedested sulfate reacts with umami and umami .
salts of strong acids and strong bases bases bases are non-volatile and often odorless .
hydrolysis is the other half of the reversible reaction equation of formation of weak salts .
the solubility is dependent on how well each ion interacts with the solvent , so certain patterns become apparent .
other examples of this are barium sulfate , calcium sulfate , and lead [mask] iimonium sulfate .
alkali metal carbonates are soluble in water .
some soluble carbonate salts are ammonium carbonate , sodium carbonate , and potassium carbonate .
for this reason , liquified molten chloride salts and solutions containing dissolved salts contain sodium chloride in water contents are called electrolytes .
sodium chloride melts at 801monium chloride .
some salts with low lattice energies are liquid at or near room temperature .
these include molten salts , which are usually mixtures of salts , and ionic liquids , which usually contain organic cations .
the name of a salt is given to the name of the cationacio n , sodium , ammonium , or chloride .
salts are often referred to only by the name of the cationadia e . g . , " sodium salt " or " ammonium salt " .
these ionic compounds are in water .
they are generally odourless and do not live in .
strong salts are especially useful when making conductive compounds .