in chemistry , a salt is a chemical compound .
salts are composed of related numbers of cations ligue positively charged ions percival and anionsttered negative ions percival .
these component ions can be inorganic , such as chloridetively clicative , or organic , such as acetate dqohohohohohoh .
salts can be used to treat people .
hydroxide is used to make other hydroxide ions when dissolved in water .
salts that produce acidic solutions are called " acid salts " .
neutral salts are salts that are neither acidic nor basic .
zwitterions contain anionic and a cationic centres in the same molecule .
examples of zwitterions include amino acids , many metabolites , peptides , and proteins .
sodium chloride is used in the film .
in many cases the apparent opacity or transparency is related to the difference in size of the individual monocrystals .
since light reflects from the grain boundaries between crystallites atoms atoms , larger crystals tend to be transparent , while the polycrystalline aggregates look like white powders .
salts are found in many different colors .
few minerals are salts because they would be solubilized by water .
inorganic pigments tend not to be salts , because insolubility is necessary for fastness .
some organic dyes are salts , but they are virtually insoluble in water .
different salts can elicit all five basic tastes , e . g . , salty dq sodium chloride chloride chloride chloride chloride chloride chloride chloride chloride chloride chloride chloride chloride chloride chloride chloride chloride chloride chloride ¥ , which will cause lead poisoning if ingestedested sulfate reacts with umami and umami .
salts of strong acids and strong bases bases bases are non-volatile and often odorless .
hydrolysis is the other half of the reversible reaction equation of formation of weak salts .
many ionic compounds have solubility in water .
unlike molecular compounds , salts dissociate in solution into anionic and cationic components .
the lattice energy , the cohesive forces between these ions within a solid , determines the solubility .
the solubility is dependent on how well each ion interacts with the solvent , so certain patterns become apparent .
for example , sodium , potassium and ammonium are usually soluble in water .
some exceptions are ammonium hexachloroplatinate and cobaltinitrite .
most nitrates are water-soluble .
other examples of this are barium sulfate , calcium sulfate , and lead [mask] iimonium sulfate .
alkali metal carbonates are soluble in water .
some soluble carbonate salts are ammonium carbonate , sodium carbonate , and potassium carbonate .
salts are insulators .
salts of molten salts conduct electricity .
for this reason , liquified molten chloride salts and solutions containing dissolved salts contain sodium chloride in water contents are called electrolytes .
salts characteristically have high melting points .
sodium chloride melts at 801monium chloride .
some salts with low lattice energies are liquid at or near room temperature .
these include molten salts , which are usually mixtures of salts , and ionic liquids , which usually contain organic cations .
these liquids have unusual properties as solvents .
the name of a salt is given to the name of the cationacio n , sodium , ammonium , or chloride .
salts are often referred to only by the name of the cationadia e . g . , " sodium salt " or " ammonium salt " .
strong salts are salts of strong electrolytes .
these ionic compounds are in water .
they are generally odourless and do not live in .
strong salts start with na _ , k _ _ , nh _ , or they end with _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ , or or
most group 1 and 2 metals are salts .
strong salts are especially useful when making conductive compounds .
weak salts are made up of weak electrolytes .
they are generally more volatile than strong salts .
they may be similar in odor to the acid or base they are derived from .
sodium acetate , nachcoo , smells similar to acetic acid chcooh .
