i , robot is a collection of nine science fiction short stories by isaac asimov .
the stories originally appeared in the american magazines " super science stories " and " astounding science fiction " between 1940 and 1950 .
the stories are woven together by a framing narrative .
the stories can be read separately , but they share a theme of the interaction of humans , robots , and morality .
several of the stories feature the character of dr . calvin , the chief robopsychologist at u . s . robots and mechanical men , inc . , the major manufacturer of robots .
when asimov published his book , he wrote a framing sequence about her life 's work .
the book also contains the short story in which asimov 's three laws of robotics first appeared .
other characters that appear in these short stories are powell and donovan .
the collection shares a title with the 1939 short story " i , robot " by eando binder dq pseudonym of earl and otto binderhausen , which greatly influenced asimov .
asimov wanted to call his collection " mind and iron " .
" the new york times " described " i , robot " as " an exciting science thriller which could be fun for those whose nerves are not already made raw by the potentialities of the atomic age . "
describing it as " continuously fascinating " , groff conklin " unreservedly recommended " the book .
p . schuyler miller recommended the collection " for puzzle situations , for humor , for warm character , and for most of the values of plain good writing " .
at least three of the short stories from " i , robot " have been adapted for television .
the first was a 1962 episode of " out of this world " hosted by boris karloff .
two short stories from the collection were made into episodes of " out of the unknown " : " the prophet " — 1967naud , based on reason ; and " liar ! "
the 12th episode of the ussr science fiction tv series " this fantastic world " was filmed in 1987 and entitled " don ' t joke with robots " .
both of the original and revival series of " the outer limits " include episodes named " i , robot " ; however , both are adaptations of the earl and otto binder story of that name and are unconnected with asimov 's work .
in the late 1970s , warner bros . decided to make a movie based on the book , but no screenplay was ever accepted .
ellison worked with asimov himself to create a version which captured the spirit of the original .
asimov is quoted as saying that this screenplay would lead to " the first really adult , complex , worthwhile science fiction movie ever made . "
ellison 's script builds a framework around asimov 's short stories that involves a reporter named robert bratenahl tracking down information about susan calvin 's former lover stephen byerly .
asimov 's stories are flashbacks that differ from the originals in their stronger emphasis on calvin 's character .
ellison placed calvin into stories in which she did not originally appear and fleshed out her character 's role in places where she did .
ellison used the movie " citizen kane " as a model .
although acclaimed by critics , the screenplay is generally considered to have been unfilmable based upon the technology and average movie budgets of the time .
asimov also believed that the movie may have been scrapped because of a conflict between ellison and the producers .
the script was serialized in " asimov 's science fiction " magazine in late 1987 .
it was released on july 16,2004 .
the story of the story is about some of asimov 's character names and the " three laws " .
however , the plot of the movie is mostly original work adapted from the screenplay " hardwired " by jeff vintar .
unlike the books by asimov , the movie had hordes of killer robots .
the movie was made into a drama version of five of the " i , robot " stories on their 15 minute drama in 2017 .
these also aired in a single program on bbc radio 4 extra as isaac asimov 's ' i , robot ' : omnibus .
mickey zucker reichert was asked to write three prequels of " i , robot " by asimov 's estate , because she is a science fiction writer with a medical degree .
she first met asimov when she was 23 , although she did not know him well .
she is the first female writer to be authorized to write stories based on asimov 's novels .
in 2004 , " the saturday evening post " said that " i , robot " 's three laws " revolutionized the science fiction genre and made robots far more interesting than they ever had been before . "
" i , robot " has influenced many aspects of popular culture , particularly with respect to science fiction and technology .
one example of this is in the technology industry .
the name of the real-life modem manufacturer named u . s . robotics was inspired by " i , robot " .
the name is taken from the name of a robot manufacturerhesis " united states robots and mechanical men " .
many works in science fiction have also paid homage to asimov 's collection .
it depicts a planet of androids in the need of humans .
another reference appears in the title of a " " episode , " i , borg " egyptardardardardardardardardy , in which geordi la forge befriends a lost member of the borg collective .
the story of the first robots , " doctor who " , was published in 1977 .
in " aliens " , a 1986 movie , the synthetic person bishop paraphrases asimov 's first law in the line : " it is impossible for me to harm , or by omission of action allow to be harmed , a human being . "
he also named " smashius clay " after all three of asimov 's laws of robotics .
the animated science fiction / comedy " futurama " makes references to " i , robot " .
the title of the episode " i , roommate " opened in 1999 is a parody on " i , robot " .
additionally , the episode " the cyber house rules " included an optician named " eye robot " and the episode " anthology of interest ii " included a segment called " i , meatbag . "
also in " bender 's game " , the psychiatrist is shown a logical fallacy and explodes when the assistant shouts " liar ! "
leela once told bender to " cover his ears " so that he would not hear the robot-destroying paradox which she used to destroy robot santa clara clara .
the positronic brain , which asimov named his robots ' central processors , is what powers data from " star trek : the next generation " , as well as other soong type androids .
positronic brains have been referenced in a number of other television shows including " doctor who " , " once upon a time . space " , " perry rhodan " , " the number of the beast " , and others .
author cory doctorow has written a story called " i , robot " .
he also said , " if i return to this theme , it will be with a story about uplifted cheese sandwiches , called ' i , rarebit . '
other cultural references to the book are less directly related to science fiction and technology .
the 1977 album " i robot " by the alan parsons project , was inspired by asimov 's " i , robot " .
the album was going to be a success on the short story collection .
the alan parsons project were not able to get the rights in spite of asimov 's enthusiasm ; he had already assigned the rights elsewhere .
thus , the album 's concept was altered a bit , although the name was kept minus comma to avoid copyright infringement proceedings .
the 2002 electronica album by experimental artist edman goodrichrichtage known , at times , to operate under the aliases of " je , le roi ! "
and " the ghost quartet " shares the title of " i , robot " .
in 2009 , he released his first album , " i , human " .
the indian science fiction film " endhiran " , released in 2010 , refers to asimov 's three laws for artificial intelligence for the fictional character chitti : the robot .
when a scientist takes in the robot for evaluation , the panel asks whether the robot was built using the three laws of robotics .
the theme for burning man 2018 is " i , robot " .
