the stories can be read separately , but they share a theme of the interaction of humans , robots , and morality .
several of the stories feature the character of dr . calvin , the chief robopsychologist at u . s . robots and mechanical men , inc . , the major manufacturer of robots .
when asimov published his book , he wrote a framing sequence about her life 's work .
the book also contains the short story in which asimov 's three laws of robotics first appeared .
the collection shares a title with the 1939 short story " i , robot " by eando binder dq pseudonym of earl and otto binderhausen , which greatly influenced asimov .
the new york times " described " i , robot " as " an exciting science thriller which could be fun for those whose nerves are not already made raw by the potentialities of the atomic age . "
p . schuyler miller recommended the collection " for puzzle situations , for humor , for warm character , and for most of the values of plain good writing " .
at least three of the short stories from " i , robot " have been adapted for television .
two short stories from the collection were made into episodes of " out of the unknown " : " the prophet " — 1967naud , based on reason ; and " liar ! "
the 12th episode of the ussr science fiction tv series " this fantastic world " was filmed in 1987 and entitled " don ' t joke with robots " .
both of the original and revival series of " the outer limits " include episodes named " i , robot " ; however , both are adaptations of the earl and otto binder story of that name and are unconnected with asimov 's work .
in the late 1970s , warner bros . decided to make a movie based on the book , but no screenplay was ever accepted .
ellison worked with asimov himself to create a version which captured the spirit of the original .
asimov is quoted as saying that this screenplay would lead to " the first really adult , complex , worthwhile science fiction movie ever made . "
ellison placed calvin into stories in which she did not originally appear and fleshed out her character 's role in places where she did .
the script was serialized in " asimov 's science fiction " magazine in late 1987 .
it was released on july 16,2004 .
the story of the story is about some of asimov 's character names and the " three laws " .
however , the plot of the movie is mostly original work adapted from the screenplay " hardwired " by jeff vintar .
the movie was made into a drama version of five of the " i , robot " stories on their 15 minute drama in 2017 .
these also aired in a single program on bbc radio 4 extra as isaac asimov 's ' i , robot ' : omnibus .
in 2004 , " the saturday evening post " said that " i , robot " 's three laws " revolutionized the science fiction genre and made robots far more interesting than they ever had been before . "
the name of the real-life modem manufacturer named u . s . robotics was inspired by " i , robot " .
the name is taken from the name of a robot manufacturerhesis " united states robots and mechanical men " .
the story of the first robots , " doctor who " , was published in 1977 .
in " aliens " , a 1986 movie , the synthetic person bishop paraphrases asimov 's first law in the line : " it is impossible for me to harm , or by omission of action allow to be harmed , a human being . "
additionally , the episode " the cyber house rules " included an optician named " eye robot " and the episode " anthology of interest ii " included a segment called " i , meatbag . "
also in " bender 's game " , the psychiatrist is shown a logical fallacy and explodes when the assistant shouts " liar ! "
leela once told bender to " cover his ears " so that he would not hear the robot-destroying paradox which she used to destroy robot santa clara clara .
the positronic brain , which asimov named his robots ' central processors , is what powers data from " star trek : the next generation " , as well as other soong type androids .
positronic brains have been referenced in a number of other television shows including " doctor who " , " once upon a time .
he also said , " if i return to this theme , it will be with a story about uplifted cheese sandwiches , called ' i , rarebit . '
the alan parsons project were not able to get the rights in spite of asimov 's enthusiasm ; he had already assigned the rights elsewhere .
thus , the album 's concept was altered a bit , although the name was kept minus comma to avoid copyright infringement proceedings .
the 2002 electronica album by experimental artist edman goodrichrichtage known , at times , to operate under the aliases of " je , le roi ! "
the indian science fiction film " endhiran " , released in 2010 , refers to asimov 's three laws for artificial intelligence for the fictional character chitti : the robot .
when a scientist takes in the robot for evaluation , the panel asks whether the robot was built using the three laws of robotics .