february is the shortest month of the year in the gregorian calendar .
it is the first of five months to have a length of less than 31 days .
in the southern hemisphere , it is the seasonal equivalent of august in the northern hemisphere .
this is a dissimilation effect which has two r s close to each other causes one to change for pronunciation .
january and february were the last two months to be added to the calendar , since the romans originally considered winter a monthless period .
february remained the last month of the calendar year until the time of the decemvirs brightened , when it became the second month .
at certain intervals february was truncated to 23 or 24 days , and a 27-day intercalary month , intercalaris was inserted immediately after february to realign the year with the seasons .
under the reforms that instituted the julian calendar , intercalaris was abolished , leap years occurred regularly every fourth year , and in leap years february gained a 29th day .
even during the middle ages , when the numbered anno domini year began on march 25 or december 25 , the second month was february whenever all twelve months were displayed in order .
the gregorian calendar reforms made slight changes to the system for determining which years were leap years and thus had a 29-day february .
historical names for february include the old english terms solmonathrricular mud month bowie and kale-monathrmed named after cabbagehesis .
in finnish , the month is called " helmiku " , meaning " month of the pearl " .
in polish and ukrainian , the month is called luty or лютии , meaning the month of ice or hard frost .
in czech , it is called " unor " , meaning " submerging of river ice " .
another name of february in slovene was " vesnar " , after the character vesna .
this last happened in 2018 and will next happen in 2037 .
this will next happen in 2033 .
february is also the only month of the calendar that , once every six years and twice every 11 years , either back into the past or forward into the future , has four full 7-day weeks .
february meteor showers include the alpha centaurids appearing in early february february february february february february est .
" this list does not necessarily imply either official status nor general observance . "
" this list does not necessarily imply either official status or general observance .
please note that all baha ' i , islamic , and jewish observances begin at the sundown before the date listed , and end at sundown of the date in question unless otherwise noted .
