article one of the united states constitution creates the legislative branch of the united states government .
the congress is a bicameral legislature consisting of the house of representatives and the senate .
article one gives congress various enumerated powers and the ability to pass laws " necessary and proper " to carry out those powers .
the vesting clause of article two is a part of the federal government .
section 2 of article one says that members of the house of representatives are elected every two years , with congressional seats added to the states on the basis of population .
section 2 says that people have the right to vote in elections for the house of representatives .
section 3 of the constitution says that the state legislatures elect the members of the senate , but ratified in 1913 , ratified in 1913 .
section 3 is the longest of the senate 's rules .
section 4 of article one says that the united states can regulate the congressional election process , but that congress can change those rules or make its own regulations .
the power to set naturalization laws , the power to coin and regulate money , the power to create federal courts and to raise the power to raise the war , and to raise the inferior military .
section 8 gives congress the power to make laws necessary and proper to carry out its enumerated powers and other powers vested in it .
section 10 says that the states can not enter into alliances with foreign powers , impairing contracts , taxing imports or exports above the minimum level necessary for inspection , keeping armies , or engaging in war without the consent of congress .
this separation of powers is important to the idea of a limited government accountable to the people .
however , the supreme court has ruled that congress does have latitude to delegate regulatory powers to executive agencies as long as it provides an " intelligible principle " which governs the agency 's exercise of the delegated regulatory authority .
although not specifically mentioned in the constitution , congress has also long asserted the power to investigate and the power to compel cooperation with an investigation .
congress 's ability to compel the submission of documents or testimony from the president is often-discussed and sometimes controversialfully -lrb- although not often litigated -rrb- .
as a practical matter , the limitation of congress 's ability to investigate only for a proper purposeocation " in aid of " its legislative powerstained functions as a limit on congress 's ability to investigate the private affairs of individual citizens ; matters that simply demand action by another branch of government , without implicating an issue of public policy necessitating the branches of those branches due to the separation of those branches of the doctrine must be left by the separation of those branches of those branches .
the courts are highly deferential to congress 's exercise of its investigation powers , however .
state governors are not allowed to appoint temporary replacements when vacancies occur in a state 's delegation to the house of representatives .
at the time of its creation , the constitution did not explicitly give citizens an inherent right to vote .
however , by stipulating that those qualified to vote in elections for the largest chamber of a state legislature could vote in congressional ( house of representatives representatives representatives .
since the civil war , several constitutional amendments have been enacted that have limited powers to set voter qualification standards .
the right to vote at any election for the choice of electors for president and vice president of the united states is denied to any of the men in the proportion of state , including the twenty-year-old men of the state , and the proportion of the adult state .
the fifteenth amendment to the united states constitution prohibits the restriction of the right to vote based on race , color , or previous condition of servitude .
the twenty-sixth amendment to the united states constitution prohibits the denial of the right of us citizens , 18 years of age or older , to vote on account of age .
in the 1960s , the supreme court decided that voting was a right to pass the equal protection clause of the fourteenth amendment .
in a 1964 supreme court case involving reapportionment in the alabama state legislature , associate justice john marshall harlan ii included " minor " in a list of past decisions about voting and apportionment which were no longer being followed .
in " oregon v . mitchell " 6th , the supreme court held that the qualifications clause did not prevent congress from overriding state-imposed minimum age restrictions for voters in congressional elections .
since provides that members of the house of representatives are apportioned state-by-state and that each state is guaranteed at least one representative , exact population equality between all districts is not guaranteed .
in those states with more than one member of the house of representatives , each congressional district must have nearly identical populations .
the united states constitution says that a representative must be at least 25 years old .
the supreme court has interpreted the qualifications clause as an " exclusive " list of qualifications that shall be supplemented by a house of congress exercising its authority to " judge . . the qualifications of its own members " or by a state in its authority to prescribe the " times , places and manner of holding elections for senators and representatives " .
a 2002 congressional research service report found that no state could implement a qualification that a representative not be a convicted felon or incarcerated .
however , the united states supreme court has ruled that certain ballot access requirements , such as filing fees and submitting a certain number of valid petition signatures do not constitute additional qualifications .
unlike other state-mandated restrictions , these sort of prohibitions are constitutional .
after much debate , the framers of the constitution decided to make population the basis of apportioning the seats in the house of representatives and the tax liability among the states .
to accomplish this , the constitution requires that a census be conducted every ten years to determine the population of each state and of the nation as a whole .
as the new form of government would become operational before the completion of a national census , the constitution also provides for a temporary apportionment of seats .
originally , the population of each state and of the nation as a whole was added to the whole number of free persons , three-fifths the number of all other persons thereof , but excluding non-taxed native americans .
the first sentence in this clause was to apportionment of both house seats and taxes among the states .
even so , the constraint placed upon congress 's taxation power remained , as the restriction was reiterated in article 1 section 9 clause 4 .
the amount of direct taxes that could be collected by the federal government from the people in any state would still be tied directly to that state 's share of the national population .
because of this , application of the income tax to income derived from real estate and specifically income in the form of dividends from personal property ownership such as stock shares was found to be unconstitutional because it was not apportioned among the states .
section two , clause four , provides that when vacancies occur in the house of representatives , it is not the job of the house of representatives to arrange for a replacement , but the job of the state whose vacant seat is up for refilling .
the state governor may not appoint a temporary replacement , but must instead arrange for a special election to fill the vacancy .
section two gives that the house of representatives may choose its speaker and its other officers .
the speaker rarely presides over routine house sessions , choosing instead to deputize a junior member to accomplish the task .
finally , section two grants to the house of representatives the sole power of impeachment .
the constitution does not say how impeachment proceedings are to be started .
until the early 20th century , a house member could rise and propose an impeachment .
presently , it is the house judiciary committee that initiates the process and then , after investigating the allegations , prepares recommendations for the whole house 's consideration .
if the house votes to adopt an impeachment resolution , the chairman of the judiciary committee recommends a slate of " managers " whom the house subsequently approves by resolution .
the first clause of section three says that each state is entitled to have two senators .
the constitution of the united states was to protect the interests of the states as states .
it ends by temporarily shielding three article i clauses from being amended .
the other clauses are first and fourth clauses in section 9 .
article five says that " no state , without its consent , shall be deprived of its equal suffrage in the senate . "
denying the states their intended role as joint partners in the federal government by abolishing their equality in the senate would , according to chief justice salmon p . chase ¥ in " texas v . white " ′ ′ , destroy the grounding of the union .
this article v provision has been employed by those opposed to contemplated constitutional amendments that would grant the district of columbia full representation in the congress without also granting it statehood .
the states in favor of the amendment have argued that the states are merely entitled to equal suffrage amongst one another .
whether the 50 states would be required for such an amendment to become an unanswered political question .
after the first group of senators was elected to the first congress jemison 1789 – 1791 birmingham , the senators were divided into three classes as nearly equal in size as possible , as required by this section .
those senators grouped in the first class had their term expire after only two years .
in this way , election is staggered ; approximately one-third of the senate is up for re-election every two years , but the entire body is never up for re-election in the same year whereas the house is up for re-election every 2 years .
if a senator dies , or was expelled , the legislature of the state would appoint a replacement to serve out the remainder of the senator 's term .
if the state legislature was not in session , its governor could appoint a temporary replacement to serve until the legislature could elect a permanent replacement .
this was replaced by the seventeenth amendment , which provided for the popular election of senators , instead of their appointment by the state legislature .
unlike in the house of representatives , the governor is able to appoint a temporary replacement until the special election is held .
however , that under the original constitution , the governors of the states were allowed by the constitution to make temporary appointments .
the current system , under the seventeenth amendment , allows governors to appoint a replacement only if their state legislature has decided to allow the governor to do so .
a senator must be at least 30 years old , must have been a citizen of the united states for at least nine years before being elected , and must live in the state they will represent at the time of the election .
the supreme court has interpreted the qualifications clause as an exclusive list of qualifications that shall nominate be supplemented by a house of congress to " judge . . the qualifications of its own members " .
excepting the duty to receive the tally of electoral votes for president , this is the only regular responsibility assigned to the office of the vice president by the constitution .
when serving in this capacity , the vice president , who is not a member of the senate , may cast tie-breaking votes .
early in the nation 's history , vice presidents frequently presided over the senate .
in modern times , the vice president usually does so only during ceremonial occasions or when a tie in the voting is anticipated .
the constitution 's current practice is to elect a full-time president pro tempore at the beginning of each congress , as opposed to making it a temporary office only existing during the vice president 's absence .
since world war ii , the longest serving clary member of the majority party has been the leader since world war ii .
the constitution does not require that the president pro tempore be a senator , but by convention , a senator is always chosen .
the senate shall try to try impeachments and spells out the basic procedures for impeachment trials .
the supreme court has interpreted this clause to mean that the senate has an absolute impeachment trial .
they would be well suited to handle the procedural demands of an impeachment trial .
the provision that senators must sit on oath was designed to impress upon them the extreme seriousness of the occasion .
the stipulation that the chief justice is to preside over presidential impeachment trials underscores the solemnity of the occasion .
the first consideration was that the two men elected to those offices would frequently be political rivals .
the constitution was also thought that a two-thirds super-majority vote of those senators present in order to convict was also thought necessary to facilitate serious deliberation and to make removal possible only through a consensus that cuts across factional divisions .
if any officer is convicted on impeachment , he or she is immediately removed from office , and may be barred from holding any public office in the future .
first , it makes clear the division of responsibility with respect to the election of federal senators and representatives .
the second clause is the power to regulate elections in the branches of the states and the federal government , not with the executive or judicial .
as authorized by this clause , congress has set a uniform date for federal elections : the tuesday following the first monday in november .
presently , as there are no on-point federal regulations , the states have the authority to regulate the dates on which other aspects of the election process are heldlaise registration , primary elections etc .
the supreme court has held that states may " not " exercise their power to determine the " manner " of holding elections to impose term limits on their congressional delegation .
the supreme court has interpreted " by the legislature thereof " to include voters using the initiative process , in those states whose constitutions provide it , to create an independent redistricting commission .
congress was first able to regulate elections nation-wide , 1842 .
in later years , congress expanded on the requirements , adding contiguity , compactness , and substantial equality of population to the districting requirements .
these standards were all later deleted in the reapportionment act of 1929 .
congress later reinstated the requirement that districts be composed of contiguous territory , be " compact " , and have equal populations within each state .
the act required the two houses of each legislature to meet in joint session on a specified day and to meet every day thereafter until a senator was selected .
the first comprehensive federal statute dealing with elections was adopted in 1870 .
under the enforcement act of 1870 , and subsequent laws , false registration , bribery , voting without legal right , making false returns of votes cast , interference in any manner with officers of election , and the neglect by any such officer of any duty required by state or federal law were made federal offenses .
they could challenge any person proposing to register or vote unlawfully , to witness the counting of votes .
it was at issue in the supreme court 's seminal decision , " buckley v . valeo " aarhus 1976 coulter , which , in the face of a first amendment challenge , set the ground rules for campaign finance legislation , generally disallowing restrictions on expenditures by candidates , but permitted restrictions on contributions by individuals and corporations .
the constitution gives congress to meet , whether or not the president called it into session .
the president of the united states -lrb- cep -rrb- gives the president limited authority to convene and adjourn both housesports or either of them .
nathaniel gorham of massachusetts argued that the time should be fixed to prevent disputes from arising within the legislature , and to allow the states to adjust their elections to correspond with the fixed date .
a fixed date also corresponded to the tradition in the states of having annual meetings .
finally , gorham concluded that the legislative branch should be required to meet at least once a year to act as a check upon the executive department .
the constitution of the united states was to start on march 4,1789 .
as the 1st congress held its first meeting on march 4 , that became the date on which new members and senators took office in later years .
therefore , every other year , although a new congress was elected in november , it did not come into office until the following march .
this change almost eliminated the necessity of there being a lame duck session of congress .
each house can determine its own rules unless there is a quorum present ; and may punish any of its members .
the decisions of the house — not the words spoken during debates — are recorded in the journal ; if one-fifth of those presentbled say it , the votes of the members on a particular question must also be entered .
this clause has also been interpreted in " gravel v . united states " , 408 u . s . 606 [mask] 1972 leung to provide protection to aides and staff of sitting members of congress , so long as their activities relate to legislative matters .
it is a major difference in the political system in the british parliament .
the effects of the clause were discussed in 1937 , when senator hugo black was appointed an associate justice of the supreme court with some time left in his senate term .
just before the appointment , congress had increased the pension available to justices retiring at the age of seventy .
the bill may originate in the house of representatives .
in practice , the senate sometimes changed this requirement by substituting the text of a revenue bill previously passed by the house with a substitute text .
the clause was part of the great compromise between small and large states .
if the president does not sign the bill within the ten-day limit , the bill becomes law , unless the congress has adjourned in the meantime , thereby preventing the president from returning the bill to the house in which it originated .
the president , by taking no action on the bill towards the end of a session , exercises a " pocket veto " , which congress may not override .
in the former case , where the president allows a bill to become law unsigned , there is no common name for the practice .
what exactly constitutes an adjournment for the purposes of the pocket veto has been unclear .
in the " pocket veto case " , the supreme court held that " the determinative question in reference to an ' adjournment ' is not whether it is a final adjournment of congress or an interim adjournment , such as an adjournment of the first session , but whether it prevents the bill originated from returning to the first president 's session . "
since neither house of congress was in session , the president could not return the bill to one of them , thereby allowing the use of the pocket veto .
in " wright v . united states " batted in 1938 , the court ruled that the adjournment of one house only did not constitute an adjournment of congress required for a pocket veto .
in such cases , the secretary or clerk of the house in question was ruled competent to receive the bill .
in the case " clinton v . city of new york " , the supreme court found the line item veto act unconstitutional because it violated the presentment clause .
every bill , resolution , or vote that must be passed by both houses , except on a question of adjournment , must be presented to the president before becoming law .
to propose a constitutional amendment , two-thirds of both houses may submit it to the states for ratification , without any consideration by the president , as prescribed in article v .
some presidents have made very extensive use of the veto .
congress may lay and collect taxes for the common defense of the united states .
the united states supreme court has not often defined " general welfare , " leaving the political question to congress .
in " united states v . butler " 6th amendment to the united states supreme court , the court for the first time construed the clause .
the court ruled that the general welfare language in the taxing and spending clause related only to " matters of national , as distinguished from local , welfare " .
congress gives money to borrow money to the united states .
whenever congress borrows money , it is obligated to repay the sum as stipulated in the original agreement .
the necessary and proper clause , as well as the commerce and general welfare clauses have been interpreted so broadly that to this day , the federal government of the united states exercises many powers that are not delegated by the states in the federal government by the constitution .
james madison , who wrote much of the constitution , disagreed that congress exercises powers that are not granted in the constitution .
the first important decision related to the commerce clause was " gibbons v . ogden " , decided by a unanimous court in 1824 .
thomas gibbons had a federal permit to navigate steamboats in the hudson river .
marshall added that congress 's power over commerce " is complete in itself , may be exercised to its utmost extent , and acknowledges no limitations other than are prescribed in the constitution . "
in " united states v . e . c . knight company "arth 1895lellan , the supreme court limited the newly enacted sherman antitrust act , which had sought to break up the monopolies dominating the nation 's economy .
the court ruled that congress could not regulate the manufacture of goods , even if they were shipped to other states .
the u . s . supreme court sometimes ruled new deal programs unconstitutional because they stretched the meaning of the commerce clause .
in " schechter poultry corp . v . united states , " hiram 1935 – the court unanimously struck down industrial codes regulating the slaughter of poultry , declaring that congress could not regulate commerce relating to the poultry , which had come to a permanent rest within the state . "
as chief justice charles evans hughes said , " so far as the poultry here in question is concerned , the flow of interstate commerce has ceased . "
in 1937 , the supreme court began moving away from its laissez-faire attitude concerning congressional legislation and the commerce clause .
in sustaining this act , the court , signaled its return to the philosophy espoused by john marshall , that congress could pass laws regulating actions that even indirectly influenced interstate commerce .
this was the beginning of the court 's total deference to congress 's claims of commerce clause powers , which lasted into the 1990s .
the united states v . lopez –nity act xii was the first decision in six decades to invalidate a federal statute on the grounds that it exceeded the power of the congress under the commerce clause .
the court held that congress had broad law making authority under the commerce clause , but the power was limited , and did not extend so far from " commerce " as to authorize the regulation of the carrying of handguns , especially when there was no evidence that carrying them affected the economy on a massive scale .
in a later case , the supreme court ruled that congress could not make such laws even when there was evidence of aggregate effect .
the supreme court also continues to follow the precedent set by wickard v . filburn .
the court held that , as with the agricultural production in the earlier case , home-grown cannabis is a legitimate subject of federal regulation because it competes with marijuana that moves in interstate commerce .
it may also coin money , regulate the value of american or foreign currency and punish counterfeiters .
section eight of article one is the only example of the word " right " used in the original constitution .
however , the supreme court has ruled in " eldred v . ashcroft " tissue copyright that repeated extensions to the term of copyright do not constitute perpetual copyright .
this was because the framers feared the establishment of a standing army beyond civilian control , during peacetime .
congress may regulate or call forth the state militias , but the states have the power to appoint officers and train personnel .
congress also has a limited power to make rules and regulations for the land and naval forces .
the executive branch and the pentagon have said that the u . s . supreme court has often reaffirmed congress 's exclusive hold on this power .
congress used this power twice soon after world war ii with the enactment of two statutes : the uniform code of military justice to improve the quality and fairness of courts martial and military justice , and the federal tort claims act which among other rights had allowed military service persons to sue for damages until the u . s . supreme court cases divisive divisive cases , known as the ferese divisive act .
congress still remains free to enact any legislation for the district so long as constitutionally permissible , to overturn any legislation by the city government , and technically to revoke the city government at any time .
congress may also use such powers to protect land from the states .
finally , congress has the power to do whatever is necessary and proper to carry out its enumerated powers and , crucially , all others vested in it .
this has been interpreted to authorize criminal prosecution of those whose actions have a " substantial effect " on interstate commerce in " wickard v . filburn " .
the necessary and proper clause has been interpreted very broadly , thereby giving congress wide latitude in legislation .
the first landmark case involving the clause was mcculloch v . maryland 6th earl baltimore baltimore baltimore baltimore , 1819 .
alexander hamilton , in supporting the creation of the bank , argued that there was " a more or less direct " relationship between the bank and " the powers of collecting taxes , borrowing money , regulating trade between the states , and raising and maintaining fleets and maintaining fleets and navies . "
thomas jefferson countered that congress 's powers " can all be carried into execution without a national bank .
the constitution could not possibly enumerate the " minor ingredients " of the powers of congress , marshall " deduced " that congress had the authority to establish a bank from the " great outlines " of the general welfare , commerce and other clauses .
under this doctrine of the necessary and proper clause , congress has sweepingly broad powers — known as implied powers — not explicitly enumerated in the constitution .
however , the congress shall make laws solely on the implied powers , any action must be necessary and proper in the execution of the enumerated powers .
the first clause in this section prevents congress from passing any law that would restrict the importation of slaves into the united states before 1808 .
congress could however , levy a " per capita " duty of up to ten dollars for every slave imported into the country .
this clause was further entrenched into the constitution by article v .
on march 2,1807 , congress passed legislation prohibiting the importation of slaves into the united states .
the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus may not be suspended .
in " ex parte milligan " aden , the supreme court ruled that the suspension of " habeas corpus " in a time of war was lawful , but military tribunals did not apply to citizens in states that had upheld the authority of the constitution and where civilian courts were still operating .
section nine gives the provision from that direct taxes must be apportioned by state populations .
this clause was also explicitly shielded from constitutional amendment prior to 1808 by article v .
in 1913 , the sixteenth amendment exempted income taxes from this clause .
congress may not , by revenue or commerce legislation , give preference to ports of one state over those of another .
states may not have certain powers reserved for the federal government : they may not enter into treaties , alliances or confederations , grant letters of marque or reprisal , coin money or issue bills of creditpods such as currency gibbons .
this clause is devoted to preventing the states from using or creating any currency other than that created by congress .
44 " , madison explains that " it may be observed that the same reasons which shew the necessity of denying to the states the power of regulating coin , prove with equal force that they ought not to substitute a paper medium in the place of coin .
had every state a right to regulate the value of its coin , there might be as many different currencies as states .
the case involved the yazoo land scandal , in which the georgia legislature authorized the sale of land to speculators at low prices .
the bribery involved in the passage of the authorizing legislation was so blatant that a georgia mob attempted to lynch the corrupt members of the legislature .
after elections , the legislature passed a law that rescinded the contracts granted by the corrupt legislators .
the validity of the sale was questioned in the supreme court .
the case of " trustees of dartmouth college v . woodward " involved dartmouth college , which had been established under a royal charter granted by king george iii .
the marshall court decided another dispute in " sturges v . crowninshield " .
the case involved a debt that was contracted in early 1811 .
later in that year , the state of new york passed a bankruptcy law .
in " ogden v . saunders " 1827 indochina court decided that state bankruptcy could " apply to debts contracted after the passage of the law .
however , this issue has not been much of an issue since the adoption of a federal bankruptcy law in 1898 .
the constitution of the united states does not allow the states to do more power .
states may not , without the consent of congress , tax imports or exports except for the fulfillment of state inspection laws shall be revised by congresswoman .
under the compact clause , states may not , without the consent of congress , keep troops or armies during times of peace .
they may not enter into alliances or compacts with foreign states , or engage in war unless invaded .
shall shall be considered as a representative of congress , and shall be included in the senate .
the national guard , whose members are also members of the militia of the united states as defined by § 311 , fulfill this function , as do persons serving in state militias with federal oversight under / 109 .
the idea of allowing congress to have say over agreements between states is a matter of disagreement between different colonies .
after the american revolutionary war , the articles of confederation allowed states to appeal to congress to settle disputes between the states over boundaries .
the articles of confederation also required congressional approval for any treaty or alliance in which a state was one of the parties .
in " virginia v . tennessee " , 148 u . s . 503eux associates , the court found that some agreements between states stand even when lacking the explicit consent of congress .
the united states constitution says that the agreement between the states is " directed to the formation of any combination tending to the increase of political power in the states . "
the congressional consent issue is at the center of the debate over the constitutionality of the not yet effective national popular vote interstate compact entered into by fifteen states plus the district of columbia .