minardi was an automobile racing team and constructor .
it competed in the formula one world championship from 1985 until 2005 .
in 2001 , to save the team from folding , minardi sold it to australian businessman paul stoddart .
from 2001 , all of minardi chassis are called " ps " .
during its time in f1 , the team scored a total of 38 championship points .
martini also recorded the team 's only front row start , qualifying 2nd at the united states grand prix , and he led a lap during the 1989 portuguese grand prix .
martini finished 4th twice in and christian fittipaldi in .
in the 21 seasons , minardi entered 37 drivers .
thirteen had italian nationality .
martini started in 103 grands prix for the team .
before minardi 's demise , the team was a well-liked team within formula one circles .
on the track , their cars were considered by many as well-designed for their tiny budget .
they also resisted employing pay drivers more than most other financially strapped teams .
former minardi drivers include grands prix winners alessandro nannini , giancarlo fisichella , jarno trulli and mark webber .
the minardi family has a longstanding involvement in motorsport .
giovanni minardi competed in his own cars in the late 1940s .
after his death , giancarlo took over the racing part of the family business .
he ran customer cars in formula two under the name scuderia everest from 1972 to 1979 .
martini sr . qualified 15th for the race of champions at brands hatch but failed to start the race after an accident during the opening lap .
martini finished 10th .
in 1979 minardi received financial support from piero mancini and set up the minardi racing team as a formula two constructor .
the team was first at the minardi name in the 1980 european formula two championship .
instead of using a customer chassis , the team commissioned a bmw powered design from giacomo caliri 's fly studios .
minardi had four moderately successful formula two seasons with a variety of young drivers .
the team 's most notable result was a 1981 win at the misano circuit by michele alboreto .
minardi left the formula two division at the end of 1984 .
in 1984 , minardi entered formula one .
when engineer carlo chiti left alfa romeo to found motori moderni , minardi became the only customer for his new v6 engine design .
the engine was not ready for the start of the season .
the single car team was unsuccessful in its first year , scoring no points .
driver pierluigi martini finished only two races .
martini 's best was 8th place .
the team expanded to two cars for the season .
in 1989 , minardi changed to cosworth .
the team was moderately successful in the midfield through the late 1980s and early 1990s .
martini in particular was synonymous with minardi , driving for three different periods .
he was the first driver to finish in the united states grand prix , in the 1988 united states grand prix .
in 1992 minardi became the first team in modern times to make use of customer engines from ferrari .
in 1993 minardi enjoyed a good campaign .
minardi slipped from the mid-field towards the back of the grid .
in minardi joined his team with bms scuderia italia in an effort to survive .
giancarlo minardi retained 14.5 % with the rest of 85.5 % .
in 1994 martini finished 5th at both the spanish grand prix and 1994 french grand prix .
bernie ecclestone spoke to flavio briatore , who agreed to buy a share in the team in 1995 .
in 1996 italian businessman gabriele rumi switched his sponsorship support to minardi .
he became the co-owner and chairman of the team .
in 1997 minardi made a team with brian hart .
for the season the team were forced to use 1998 ford zetec-r v10 engines .
rumi 's health forced him to withdraw his backing at the end of the season .
pedro lamy scored his one and only point in formula one with a sixth place in the australian grand prix .
luca badoer had been running fourth until his gearbox failed with 13 laps to go , at which point the italian burst into tears next to his stricken car .
other minardi drivers also came close to scoring points .
minardi was known for not using pay drivers .
the team , now near collapse , was purchased by australian businessman paul stoddart in early 2001 .
minardi gave alonso his debut , despite being unable to score any points for minardi .
minardi 's performance at the 2002 australian grand prix ended up to be particularly successful .
another memorable episode happened during the 2003 brazilian grand prix .
the race was stopped after 75 % distance .
stoddart later said that verstappen had enough fuel on board to last until just after the time the red flag was eventually waved , due to the large number of safety car laps .
assuming stoddart is being truthful , verstappen may have won this race had he not spun .
during its final years , the minardi team was almost as famous for its race .
stoddart was described as the formula one teams ' unofficial steward .
stoddart tried to get reduced costs in the sport .
he wanted an agreement where the independent cox cox and , on the whole , financially weaker teams in formula one would get cheaper engine deals .
in return , the team principals who would benefit from this would support the factory teams when it came to opposing new rule changes enforced by the fia , such as the proposed ban on traction control .
before the start of the season , stoddart threatened to withdraw his support against the ban on traction control , but later changed his mind .
midway through the 2004 season , the other teams voted to change the unpopular single lap qualifying system back to old 1 hour format , but stoddart voted against because it would also mean the 107 % rule was reintroduced .
before the australian grand prix stoddart threatened to withdraw his cars .
stoddart claimed that minardi could not afford to adapt their cars .
once again stoddart ended up withdrawing his threat .
stoddart has also called for the resignation of max mosley , who was the fia 's president .
while minardi had run bridgestone tires , stoddart had offered to compromise with the michelin teams .
minardi was represented by two rookies , italian gianmaria " gimmi " bruni and hungarian zsolt baumgartner .
during the year , they celebrated their 20th season in f1 .
baumgartner scored minardi 's first point in more than two years at the united states grand prix .
baumgartner was the first hungarian to score a point in a world championship f1 race .
in 2005 , minardi 's drivers were christijan albers and patrick friesacher .
they amassed a total of 7 points after the debacle of the united states grand prix .
after losing financial support from his sponsors before the german grand prix , patrick friesacher was replaced by dutch jordan test driver robert doornbos .
paul stoddart said that he would sell minardi if he could find the right buyer .
stoddart said that he had 41 offers .
his idea for sale was the ability of a buyer to move the team forward and leave the team based in faenza .
the drinks manufacturer red bull already owned a formula one team , red bull racing .
on 10 september 2005 red bull announced it would take control of minardi in november and run it as their " rookie team " from 2006 .
minardi fans worldwide immediately started an online petition to save the minardi team name and the team 's 20-year heritage in f1 after the news broke .
the team was renamed scuderia toro rosso for the 2006 season .
the red bull won the race at the italian grand prix .
giancarlo minardi and paul stoddart both use the minardi name in new races .
on 1 january 2006 giancarlo minardi re-acquired certain rights to use the minardi name in racing .
he also announced that he was licensing the minardi name to team gp racing in the junior euro formula 3000 series , to be entitled ' minardi team by gp racing ' .
the team raced with moderate success , scoring a podium in each leg of the spa round in june 2006 .
for 2007 , minardi team by gp racing combined forces with piquet sports to form minardi piquet sports .
for 2008 the team was known simply as piquet sports .
in 2006 , paul stoddart announced his intention to enter a new team called ' european minardi f1 team ltd ' into formula one beginning in .
his application was unsuccessful , with the 12th place on the grid being awarded to prodrive .
stoddart turned his attentions to the champ car series .
on 18 december 2006 , it was confirmed that he had purchased a controlling interest in the cte racing-hvm champ car team .
in 2007 , the team had some success .
he finished third in the series .
stoddart 's team entering the indycar series under the hvm name .
stoddart has the right to use the minardi name for a british-registered company .
