terence hanbury whitettered 29 may 1906 – 17 january 1964orf was an english author .
one of his most memorable is the first of the series , " the sword in the stone " , published as a stand-alone book in 1938 .
his parents separated when he was 14 .
while at queens ' college , white wrote a thesis on thomas malory 's " le morte d ' arthur " , and graduated in 1928 with a first-class degree in english .
the same year , he left stowe school and lived in a workman 's cottage nearby .
white also became interested in aviation , partly to conquer his fear of heights .
white 's novel " earth stopped " egypt -lrb- 1934 -rrb- and its sequel " gone to ground " ; 1935 -rrb- are science fiction novels about a disaster that devastates the world .
white wrote to a friend that in autumn 1937 , " i got desperate among my books and picked malory up in lack of anything else .
i was thrilled and astonished to find that ƒ aifice the thing was a perfect tragedy , with a beginning , a middle and an end implicit in the beginning and muhammad b dynasties that could be forecast .
" the sword in the stone " was critically well-received and was a book of the month club selection in 1939 .
in february 1939 , white moved to doolistown in county meath , ireland .
in ireland , he wrote most of what would later become " the once and future king " ; two sequels to " the sword in the stone " were published during this time : " the witch in the wood " and " the ill-made knight " in 1939 , and " the ill-made knight " in 1940 .
the version of " the sword in the stone " included in " the once and future king " differs in several respects from the earlier version .
the war had a big effect on these tales of king arthur .
the same year , white published mistress masham 's repose , a children 's book .
in 1947 , he published " the elephant and the kangaroo " .
it was written at his cottage in the mid-1930s .
in 1958 , he completed the fourth book of the " candle in the wind " sequence .
white lived to see his work adapted as the broadway musical " camelot " egypt , 1960 – 61 , and the animated movie " the sword in the stone " – 1963 .
white died on 17 january 1964 aboard ship in piraeus , athens , greece , during a lecture tour in the united states .
he had no long romantic relationships .
in his diaries of zed , a young boy , he wrote : " i have fallen in love with zed . . the whole situation is an impossible one .
broadcaster robert robinson published an account of a conversation with white .
he was friend and literary agent david higham , who said , " tim was no homosexual , though i think at one time he had feared he was stripped and in his ethos fear would have been the word edit . "
higham gave warner the address of one of white 's lovers .
lin carter in his book " imaginary worlds " , which was about white as a man who felt deeply but was unable to form close human relationships due to his unfortunate childhood : " he was a man with an enormous capacity for loving .
it shows in his prodigious correspondence and in his affection for dogs .
white was agnostic , and towards the end of his life a heavy drinker .
fantasy writer michael moorcock enjoyed white 's " the once and future king " , and was especially influenced by the realism in his work .
later , he said that " white gave me some very good advice on how to write " .
j . k . rowling has said that white 's writing strongly influenced the " harry potter " books .
he said that he did not think rowling had based her character on hunter .
gregory maguire was influenced by " white 's ability to be intellectually broadminded , to be comic , to be poetic , and to be fantastic " in the writing of his 1995 novel " wicked " , and crime fiction writer ed mcbain also cited white as an influence .
white won the 2014 samuel johnson prize for non-fiction .
