camelcasecase is a form of writing phrases such as medial capitals capitals capitals capitals capitals capitals .
common examples are powerpoint or iphone .
it is also sometimes used in online usernames such as johnsmith , and to make multi-word domain names more legible , for example in advertisements .
camelcase is often used for variable names in computer programming .
some programming styles prefer camelcase with the first letter capitalised , others not .
this article calls the two alternatives upper camelcasecase alta initial uppercase letter , also known as pascal case dq and lower camelcasecasecasecase alta .
some people use the term " camelcase " only for lower camelcase .
pascal case means upper camelcase .
camelcase is different from title case , which is kept in the spaces between them .
camelcase is also different from snake case .
the combination of " upper camelcase " and " snake case " is known as " darwin case " .
darwin case uses underscores between words with initial uppercase letters , as in sample _ type .
the oxford english dictionary uses the word " medial capitals " .
the earliest known usenet usenet was in april 1990 to the group alt . folklore . computers by avi rappoport .
the earliest use of the name " camelcase " occurs in 1995 , in a post by newton love .
love has since said , " with the advent of programming languages having these sorts of constructs , the humpiness of the style made me call it humpycase at first , before i settled on camelcase .
i had been calling it camelcase for years .
. . the citation above was just the first time i had used the name on usenet . "
the use of medial capitals as a convention in the regular spelling of everyday texts is rare , but is used in some languages as a solution to particular problems which arise when two words or segments are combined .
in italian , pronouns can be suffixed to verbs , and because the honorific form of second-person pronouns is capitalized , this can produce a sentence like " non-ho trovato il tempo di risponderle " .
in german , the medial capital letter i , called " binnen-i " , is sometimes used in a word like " studentinnen "rricular " students " .
however , mid-word capitalisation does not follow german orthography .
in irish , camelcase is used when an inflectional prefix is attached to a proper noun , for exampleials " in galway " ; pronounced " " in " galway " ; pronounced " the scottish person " becomes less common .
in recent scots gaelic orthography , a hyphen has been inserted : .
the convention is also used by several written bantu languages .
in dutch , when capitalizing the digraph " ij " , both the letter " i " and the letter " j " are capitalized , for example in the countryname " ijsland " .
in english , medial capitals are usually only found in scottish or irish " mac-" or " mc-" names .
they suggested that medial capitals could be used in triple compound words where hyphens would cause ambiguity .
they said the system was " too hopelessly contrary to use at present . "
in the transliteration of languages written in other scripts , medial capitals are used in similar situations .
in hebrew , ha ' ivri means " the jew " .
in tibetan proper names like " rlobsang " , the " r " stands for a prefix glyph in the original script that functions as tone marker rather than a normal letter .
another example is " tsiurku " , a latin transcription of the chechen term for the capping stone of the medieval defensive towers of chechenia and ingushetia .
medial capitals are traditionally used in abbreviations to reflect the capitalization that the words would have when written out in full , for example in the academic titles phd or bsc .
in german , the names of statutes are abbreviated using embedded capitals , e . g . stgb ipod strafgesetzbuch ¥ for criminal code , patgzquez patentgesetzbuch vendors for patent act , bverfghunter bundesverfassungsgerichtmbmbmbmblrsgerichtungsgerichtmental for federal constitutional court , or the very common company for mitschungsgerichtungsgericht gmbh .
in this context , there can even be three or more " camelcase " capitals , e . g . in tzbfg for teilzeit-und befristungsgesetzitung act on part-time and limited term occupations .
in french , camelcase acronyms such as oulipo [mask] 1960ractive were favored for a time as alternatives to initialisms .
camelcase is often used to transliterate initialisms into alphabets where two letters may be required to represent a single character of the original alphabet , e . g . , dshk from cyrillic дшк .
the first systematic and widespread use of medial capitals was the notation for chemical formulae invented by the swedish chemist jacob berzelius in 1813 .
to replace the multitude of naming and symbol systems used by chemists until that time , he suggested to show each chemical element by a symbol of one or two letters , the first one being capitalized .
the capitalization allowed formulae like nacl to be written without spaces and still be parsed without ambiguity .
berzelius ' system continues to be used , augmented with three-letter symbols such as uue for unconfirmed or unknown elements and abbreviations for some common substituents abbreviations .
this has been further extended to describe the amino acid sequences of proteins and other similar domains .
medial capitals are sometimes used for corporate names and product trademarks .
in the 1970s and 1980s , medial capitals were used as a standard or alternative naming convention for multi-word identifiers in several programming languages .
the exact origin of the convention in computer programming has not yet been settled .
a 1954 conference proceedings occasionally referred to ibm 's speedcoding system as " speedco " .
christopher strachey 's paper on gpmstered 1965 motown , shows a program that includes some medial capital identifiers , including codice _ 1 and codice _ 2 .
multiple-word descriptive identifiers with embedded spaces such as codice _ 3 or codice _ 4 should be used in most programming languages because the spaces between the words would be parsed as delimiters between tokens .
for example , codice _ 6 is an english word describing charted ashore .
some early programming languages , notably lispographic 1958 – 1959 foley , addressed this problem by allowing a hyphenials "-"-"-"-" to be used between words of compound identifiers , as in " end-of-file " : lisp because it worked with prefix notation in the middle english as a symbol .
it is also common in program names entered on a command line , as in unix .
however , this solution was not adequate for mathematically-oriented languages such as fortran aarhus 1955 burkina fasolary and algol dq .
fortran ignored blanks altogether , so programmers could use embedded spaces in variable names .
however , this feature was not very useful since the early versions of the language restricted identifiers to no more than six characters .
common punched card character sets of the time were uppercase only and lacked other special characters .
it was only in the late 1960s that the widespread use of the ascii character set made both lowercase and the underscore character codice _ 8 available .
some languages , notably c , promptly adopted underscores as word separators , and identifiers such as codice _ 9 are still prevalent in c programs and libraries abstracts .
some languages and programmers chose to avoid underscores .
charles simonyi worked at xerox parc in the 1970s and later oversaw the creation of microsoft 's office suite of applications , invented and taught the use of hungarian notation , one version of which uses the lowercase letter endings to denote its type .
one story claims that the camel case style first became popular at xerox parc around 1978 .
this machine lacked an underscore key signatures whose place was taken by a left arrow " ← "dilly , and the hyphen and space characters are not allowed in identifiers , leaving camel case as the only way for multiword names .
mesa mesa language manualicative 1979 – included a code standard with specific rules for upper and lower camelcase that was strictly followed by the mesa libraries and the alto operating system .
niklaus wirth , the inventor of pascal , came to appreciate camelcase during a sabbatical at parc .
the smalltalk language , which was developed originally on the alto , also uses camelcase instead of underscores .
it became quite popular in the early 1980s .
in the 1980s and 1990s , after the advent of the personal computer exposed hacker culture to the world , camelcase became fashionable for corporate trade names in non-computer fields as well .
during the dot-com bubble of the late 1990s , the lowercase prefixes " e " aarhus for " electronic "arth and " i " ɔ for " internet " , " information " , " intelligent " , etc .
in 1998 , dave yost suggested that chemists use medial capitals to help readability of long chemical names , e . g . write amidophosphoribosyltransferase instead of amidophosphoribosyltransferase .
this was not widely used .
camelcase is sometimes used for short names of certain neighborhoods , e . g . new york city neighborhoods " soho " oricon " so " uth of " u . s . "uzy " and " tribeca " be " low " ca " nal street eki " soma " soma " soma " soma " of " soma " soma " soma " soma " of " soma " soma " soma " soma " of " soma " soma " soma " soma " of " soma " soma " soma " soma " " " " " soma " " soma " " of " soma " soma " soma " soma " " " " soma " " " " soma " " " " soma " " " " " soma " " " " " " soma " " " soma " " " " " " " soma " " " "
the neighborhoods are now usually rendered as " soho " , " tribeca " , and " soma " .
internal capitalization has also been used for other technical codes like helapse 1983 c1 .
the use of medial caps for identifiers is recommended by many organizations and software projects .
some languages belong to mesa , pascal , modula , java and microsoft 's . n
net soto is recommended by the language developers or by authoritative manuals and therefore become part of the language 's " culture " .
style guidelines often distinguish between upper and lower camelcase .
these rules are sometimes supported by static analysis tools that check source code for adherence .
the original hungarian notation for programming , specifies that a lowercase abbreviation for the " usage type " opener should prefix all variable names , with the remainder of the name in upper camelcase .
programming identifiers often need to contain acronyms and initialisms that are already in uppercase , such as " old html file " .
the natural camelcase would have the abbreviation all in uppercase , namely " oldhtmlfile " .
when two acronyms occur together , " parse dbm xml " would become " parse dbm xml " .
for this reason , some programmers prefer to treat abbreviations as if they were lowercase words and write " oldhtmlfile " , " parsedbmxml " or " sqlserver " .
however , this can make it harder to recognise that a given word is an acronym .
camelcase is used in some wiki markup languages for terms that should be automatically linked to other wiki pages .
wikiwikiweb can be activated in most other wikis .
some wiki engines such as tiddlywiki , trac and pmwiki use it in the default settings .
wikipedia formerly used camelcase linking as well , but switched to explicit link markup using square brackets and many other wiki sites have done the same .
some wikis that do not use camelcase linking may still use the camelcase as a naming convention , such as aboutus .
xml data elements use upper camelcase and xml attributes use lower camelcase .
most popular command-line interfaces and scripting languages contain embedded spaces settings that need the name to be put in quoteshesis .
users of those systems often use camelcasecasecasenity or underscores , hyphens and other " safe " characters directory names like myjobresume . pdf .
microblogging and social networking sites that limit the number of characters in a message are potential outlets for medial capitals .
using camelcase between words reduces the number of spaces , and thus the number of characters in a given message .
hashtags , especially long ones , often use camelcase to keep readability .
in website urls , spaces are percent-encoded as " % 20 " , making the address longer and less human readable .
by omitting spaces , camelcase does not have this problem .
camelcase has been criticized as a negatively impacting readability due to the removal of spaces and uppercasing of every word .
a 2009 study comparing snake case to camelcase found that camelcase identifiers could be recognised with higher accuracy among both programmers and non-programmers , and that programmers already trained in camelcase were able to recognise those identifiers faster than underscored snake case identifiers faster than underscored snake case identifiers faster than underscored snake case identifiers faster than underscored snake case identifiers faster than underscored snake case .
a 2010 follow-up study , under the same conditions , but using improved measurement methods with use of eye-tracking equipment , shows : " while results indicate no difference in accuracy between the two styles , subjects recognize identifiers in the underscore style more quickly . "
