metamorphosis is a process by which an animal physically develops after birth or hatching .
some insects , fish , amphibians , mollusks , crustaceans , cnidarians , echinoderms , and tunicates undergo metamorphosis .
animals can be divided into species that undergo complete metamorphosis sooner .
scientific usage of the term is technically precise , and it is not applied to general aspects of cell growth , including rapid growth spurts .
goethe 's " metamorphosis of plants " have influenced the development of ideas of evolution .
the word " metamorphosis " comes from greek , " transformation , transforming " , from kellan " " after " andteryx " shape " .
metamorphosis is the most basic feature of all chordates .
in insects growth and metamorphosis are controlled by hormones synthesized by hormones near the front of the body bethel anteriorvation .
neurosecretory cells in an insect 's brain secrete a hormone , the prothoracicotropic hormone dq ptthography .
the ptth also stimulates the corpora allata , a retrocerebral organ , to produce juvenile hormone , which prevents the development of adult characteristics during ecdysis .
in holometabolous insects , moult between larval instars have a high level of juvenile hormone , the moult to the pupal stage has a low level of juvenile hormone , and the final , or imaginal , molt has no juvenile hormone present at all .
experiments on firebugs have shown how young hormone can affect the number of nymph instar stages in insects .
all three categories of metamorphosis can be found in the diversity of insects .
ametabolous insects have very little differences between larval and adult forms .
in hemimetabolous insects , immature stages are called nymphs .
development proceeds in repeated stages of growth and ecdysischment .
the juvenile forms closely resemble adults , but are smaller and lack adult features such as wings and genitalia .
the size of nymphs in different instars are small , often just differences in body proportions and the number of segments .
in holometabolous insects , immature stages are called larvae .
then they enter an inactive state called pupa ( called a " chrysalis " in butterfly specieshesis .
the earliest insect forms showed direct development .
some early ametabolous " true insects " are still present today , such as bristletails and silverfish .
some of the bugs are cockroaches , grasshoppers , and true bugs .
all insects in the pterygota have a marked change in form , texture and physical appearance from immature stage to adult .
these insects either have haemememememogenous development , and undergo an incomplete or partial metamorphosis , which undergo a complete metamorphosis , including a pupal or resting stage between the larval and adult forms .
a number of hypotheses have been proposed to explain the evolution of holometaboly from hemimetaboly .
more recently , scientific attention has turned to characterize the mechanistic basis of metamorphosis in terms of its hormonal control .
according to research from 2008 , adult " manduca sexta " is able to keep behaviour learned as a caterpillar .
another caterpillar , the ornate moth caterpillar , is able to carry toxins .
many observations have indicated that programmed cell death plays a considerable role during physiological processes of multicellular organisms , particularly during embryogenesis and metamorphosis .
below are the sequence of the metamorphosis of the butterfly moths illustrated annette bening .
the cocoon is fully formed 4 – adult butterfly coming out of the cocoon cocoon .
in cephalochordata , metamorphosis is iodothyronine-induced .
some fish , like osteichthyeschenko and jawless fish undergo metamorphosis .
fish metamorphosis is controlled by the thyroid hormone .
examples of non-bony fish include the lamprey .
among the bony fish , mechanisms are varied .
the salmon is diadromous , meaning that it changes from a freshwater to a saltwater lifestyle .
many species of flatfish begin their life bilaterally symmetrical , with an eye on either side of the body .
the european eel has a number of metamorphoses , from the larval stage to the leptocephalus stage .
in the pre-adult freshwater stage , the eel also has phenotypic plasticity because fish-eating eels develop very wide mandibles , making the head look blunt .
leptocephali are common in elopomorphazquez and eel-like fishfolk .
most other bony fish undergo metamorphosis from embryo to larva ɔ fry colour and then to the juvenile stage during absorption of the yolk sac .
in typical amphibian development , eggs are laid in water and larvae are adapted to an aquatic lifestyle .
frogs , toads , and newts all hatch from the eggs as larvae with external gills .
after that , tadpoles start a predatory lifestyle .
metamorphosis in amphibians is controlled by thyroxin concentration in the blood .
specific events are dependent on threshold values for different tissues .
most embryonic development is outside the parental body .
for this reason tadpoles can have horny ridges for teeth , whiskers , and fins .
they also make use of the lateral line organ .
after metamorphosis , these organs become redundant and will be resorbed by controlled cell death , called apoptosis .
many discoveries are still being made .
with frogs and toads , the external gills of the newly hatched tadpole are covered with a gill sac after a few days , and lungs are quickly formed .
the front legs are formed under the gill sac , and the hind legs can be seen a few days later .
following that there is usually a longer stage during which the tadpole lives off a vegetarian diet .
tadpoles use a relatively long , spiral ‐ shaped gut to digest their diet .
rapid changes in the body can then be observed as the frog changes completely .
the spiral ‐ shaped mouth with horny tooth ridges is resorbed together with the spiral gut .
the animal develops a big jaw , and its gills disappear along with its gill sac .
all this can happen in about a day , so it is truly a metamorphosis .
it is not until a few days later that the tail is reabsorbed .
salamander development is highly diverse ; some species go through a dramatic reorganization when changing from aquatic larvae to terrestrial adults , while others , such as the axolotl , display paedomorphosis and never develop into adults .
within the genus " ambystoma " , species have evolved to be paedomorphic several times , and paedomorphosis and complete development can both occur in some species .
in newts , there is no true metamorphosis .
they will be resorbed just before the animal leaves the water .
just as in tadpoles , their lungs are functional early , but newts use them less frequently than tadpoles .
they often have an aquatic phase in spring and summer .
for adaptation to a water phase , prolactin is the required hormone , and for adaptation to the land phase thyroxin .
external gills do not return in subsequent aquatic phases .
basal caecilians such as " ichthyophis " go through a metamorphosis in which aquatic larva change into adults which involves a loss of the lateral line .
more recently diverged caeciliansqually do not undergo an ontogenetic niche shift of this sort .
most caecilians do not undergo an anuran-like metamorphosis .
