animals can be divided into species that undergo complete metamorphosis sooner .
scientific usage of the term is technically precise , and it is not applied to general aspects of cell growth , including rapid growth spurts .
metamorphosis is the most basic feature of all chordates .
in insects growth and metamorphosis are controlled by hormones synthesized by hormones near the front of the body bethel anteriorvation .
the ptth also stimulates the corpora allata , a retrocerebral organ , to produce juvenile hormone , which prevents the development of adult characteristics during ecdysis .
in holometabolous insects , moult between larval instars have a high level of juvenile hormone , the moult to the pupal stage has a low level of juvenile hormone , and the final , or imaginal , molt has no juvenile hormone present at all .
all three categories of metamorphosis can be found in the diversity of insects .
in hemimetabolous insects , immature stages are called nymphs .
the juvenile forms closely resemble adults , but are smaller and lack adult features such as wings and genitalia .
then they enter an inactive state called pupa ( called a " chrysalis " in butterfly specieshesis .
some early ametabolous " true insects " are still present today , such as bristletails and silverfish .
all insects in the pterygota have a marked change in form , texture and physical appearance from immature stage to adult .
these insects either have haemememememogenous development , and undergo an incomplete or partial metamorphosis , which undergo a complete metamorphosis , including a pupal or resting stage between the larval and adult forms .
more recently , scientific attention has turned to characterize the mechanistic basis of metamorphosis in terms of its hormonal control .
according to research from 2008 , adult " manduca sexta " is able to keep behaviour learned as a caterpillar .
many observations have indicated that programmed cell death plays a considerable role during physiological processes of multicellular organisms , particularly during embryogenesis and metamorphosis .
below are the sequence of the metamorphosis of the butterfly moths illustrated annette bening .
the salmon is diadromous , meaning that it changes from a freshwater to a saltwater lifestyle .
many species of flatfish begin their life bilaterally symmetrical , with an eye on either side of the body .
the european eel has a number of metamorphoses , from the larval stage to the leptocephalus stage .
in the pre-adult freshwater stage , the eel also has phenotypic plasticity because fish-eating eels develop very wide mandibles , making the head look blunt .
most other bony fish undergo metamorphosis from embryo to larva ɔ fry colour and then to the juvenile stage during absorption of the yolk sac .
in typical amphibian development , eggs are laid in water and larvae are adapted to an aquatic lifestyle .
most embryonic development is outside the parental body .
for this reason tadpoles can have horny ridges for teeth , whiskers , and fins .
they also make use of the lateral line organ .
after metamorphosis , these organs become redundant and will be resorbed by controlled cell death , called apoptosis .
with frogs and toads , the external gills of the newly hatched tadpole are covered with a gill sac after a few days , and lungs are quickly formed .
the front legs are formed under the gill sac , and the hind legs can be seen a few days later .
following that there is usually a longer stage during which the tadpole lives off a vegetarian diet .
rapid changes in the body can then be observed as the frog changes completely .
salamander development is highly diverse ; some species go through a dramatic reorganization when changing from aquatic larvae to terrestrial adults , while others , such as the axolotl , display paedomorphosis and never develop into adults .
within the genus " ambystoma " , species have evolved to be paedomorphic several times , and paedomorphosis and complete development can both occur in some species .
in newts , there is no true metamorphosis .
just as in tadpoles , their lungs are functional early , but newts use them less frequently than tadpoles .
for adaptation to a water phase , prolactin is the required hormone , and for adaptation to the land phase thyroxin .
more recently diverged caeciliansqually do not undergo an ontogenetic niche shift of this sort .