he launched the norman conquest of england six years later .
the rest of his life was marked by struggles to consolidate his hold over england and his continental lands and by difficulties with his eldest son .
during his childhood and adolescence , members of the norman aristocracy battled each other , both for control of the child duke and for their own ends .
his marriage in the 1050s to matilda of flanders provided him with a powerful ally in the neighbouring county of flanders .
by 1062 william got control of the county of maine .
in the 1050s and early 1060s william became a contender for the throne of england .
edward was named the next king by edward on the dying of the next king .
by 1075 william 's hold on england was mostly secure .
william 's final years were marked by difficulties in his continental domains , troubles with his eldest son , and threatened invasions of england by the danes .
in 1086 william bought the landholdings in england with the pre-conquests and the landholdings of the land .
he died in 1087 while leading a campaign in northern france .
william 's lands were divided after his death .
the city was settled before 911 , when rollo , one of the viking leaders , and king charles the simple of france reached an agreement surrendering the county of rouen to rollo .
the lands around rouen became the center of the later duchy of normandy .
emma and edward went into exile in normandy .
after cnut 's death in 1035 , the english throne became king .
alfred returned to england in 1036 to visit his mother .
one story says that earl godwin of wessex was murdered by alfred .
emma went into exile in flanders until harthacanute became king after edward 's death in 1040 .
she later married herluin de conteville , with whom she had two sons – odo of bayeux and robert , count of mortain .
robert became duke of normandy on 6 august 1027 , succeeding his elder brother richard iii , who had only succeeded to the title the previous year .
this was probably in an attempt to take control .
by 1031 robert had gathered considerable support from noblemen , many of whom would become prominent during william 's life .
robert 's uncle , archbishop of rouen , had originally opposed the duke , osbern , a nephew of gunnor the wife of duke richard i , and count gilbert of brionne , a grandson of richard i .
after his accession , robert continued norman support for the english princes edward and alfred , who were still in exile in northern france .
there are indications that robert may have been briefly betrothed to a daughter of cnut , but no marriage took place .
it is unclear if william would have been supplanted in the ducal succession if robert had a legitimate son .
william 's association with his father on ducal charters shows that william was considered robert 's most likely heir .
although some of his supporters tried to stop him from doing the journey , robert convened a council in january 1035 .
william faced several challenges on becoming duke , including his illegitimate birth and his youth .
he enjoyed the support of his great-uncle , archbishop robert , as well as the king of france , henry i , enabling him to succeed to his father 's duchy .
archbishop robert 's death in march 1037 removed one of william 's main supporters .
the anarchy in the duchy lasted until 1047 , and control of the young duke was one of the priorities of those contending for power .
when alan died in either late 1039 or october 1040 , gilbert of brionne took charge of william .
gilbert was killed within months .
osbern was killed in the early 1040s in william 's chamber .
walter , william 's maternal uncle , was occasionally forced to hide the young duke in the houses of peasants .
william was raised with the three cousins who later became important in his career .
the church was supportive of william .
in late 1046 , the king henry vi of england , led by guy of burgundy , the cotentin , and ranulf , viscount of the bessin .
he escaped under cover of darkness , seeking refuge with king henry .
in early 1047 henry and william returned to normandy and were defeated at the battle of val-es-dunes near caen .
william of poitiers claimed that the battle was won mainly through william 's efforts .
william took power in normandy , and shortly after the battle created the truce of god throughout his duchy .
although the battle of val-es-dunes marked a turning point in william 's control of the duchy , it was not the end of his struggle to gain the upper hand over the nobility .
william 's next efforts were against guy of burgundy , who retreated to his castle at brionne , which william besieged .
to address the growing power of the count of anjou , geoffrey martel , william joined with king henry in a campaign against him .
they held belleme on the border of maine and normandy .
when hugh of maine died , geoffrey martel occupied maine in a move contested by william and king henry .
he was able to assert his overlordship over the belleme family and compel them to act consistently in norman interests .
but in 1052 the king and geoffrey martel made common cause against william at the same time as some norman nobles began to contest william 's increasing power .
henry 's about-face was probably motivated by a desire to retain control over normandy .
in 1054 the king and the norman rebels attacked normandy .
the second , which included some who became william 's firm supporters , such as robert , count of eu , walter giffard , roger of mortemer , and william de warenne , faced the other invading force .
in addition to ending both invasions , the battle allowed the duke 's ecclesiastical supporters to depose mauger from the archbishopric of rouen .
henry and geoffrey led another invasion of normandy in 1057 but were defeated by william at the battle of varaville .
henry tried to dislodge william , but the siege of thimert lasted for two years until henry 's death .
the deaths of count geoffrey and the king in 1060 cemented the shift in the balance of power towards william .
pope leo ix forbade the marriage at the council of rheims in october 1049 .
papal sanction was not reliable until 1059 , but as papal-norman clergy were good , and norman clergy were able to visit rome in 1050 without incident .
the pope and the pope had to have two monasteries in caen .
the marriage was important in bolstering william 's status , as flanders was one of the more powerful french territories .
no real portrait of william has been found .
he was strong enough to draw bows that others could not pull and had great stamina .
geoffrey martel described him as without equal as a fighter and as a horseman .
the only bone to survive was the rest of his remains were destroyed .
there are two tutors for the young duke during the late 1030s and early 1040s .
he was not a patron of authors .
he was unable to give enough time to the effort and quickly gave up .
his marriage to matilda seems to have been quite affectionate .
he also relied on the clergy for advice , including lanfranc , a non-norman who rose to become one of william 's prominent ecclesiastical advisers in the late 1040s and remained so throughout the 1050s and 1060s .
william gave generously to the church ; from 1035 to 1066 , the norman aristocracy founded at least 20 new monasteries .
in 1051 the childless king edward of england chose william as his successor to the english throne .
the anglo-saxon chronicle , in the " d " version , says that william visited england in 1051 .
the trip is unlikely given william 's absorption in warfare with anjou at the time .
edward married edith , godwin 's daughter , in 1043 .
by 1050 , relations between the king and the earl had baded .
when edward returned from exile in 1052 , king edward and the earl were taken back to england .
the two norman sources that mention it are william of jumieges and william of poitiers .
william had betrothed his oldest son robert to herbert 's sister margaret .
he also allowed his son robert curthose to do homage to the new count of anjou , geoffrey the bearded .
its effect was to destabilise brittany , forcing the duke , conan ii , to focus on internal problems rather than on expansion .
in 1053 , harold succeeded to his father 's earldom , and another son , tostig , became earl of northumbria .
harold took part in william 's breton campaign of 1064 .
it may have been norman propaganda designed to discredit harold , who was the main contender to replace king edward .
meanwhile , another contender for the throne had emerged – edward the exile , son of edmund ironside and a grandson of æthelred ii , returned to england in 1057 , and although he died shortly after his return , he brought with his family , which included two daughters , margaret and christina , and a son , edgar the ætheling .
in 1065 northumbria revolted against tostig .
the normans say that harold was named as the next king , but they say that edward 's promise of the throne could not be changed on edward 's deathbed .
later english sources stated that harold had been elected as king by the clergy and magnates of england .
the coronation was performed by stigand , who was considered a non-canonical archbishop by the pope .
harold 's claim to the throne was not entirely secure , however , as there were other claimants , perhaps including his exiled brother tostig .
he landed at the isle of wight with a fleet supplied by baldwin of flanders .
tostig was captured and retreated to scotland , where he remained for a time .
according to the norman writer william of jumieges , william had meanwhile sent an embassy to king harold godwinson to remind harold of his oath to support william 's claim .
harold gathered an army and a fleet to capture william 's invasion force .
william of poitiers describes a council called by duke william .
most of those assembled would have been anxious to secure their share of the rewards from the conquest of england .
william of poitiers also says that the duke obtained the permission of pope alexander ii for the invasion , along with a papal banner .
the chronicler also claimed that the duke secured the support of holy roman emperor henry iv and king sweyn ii of denmark .
henry was still a minor , and sweyn was more likely to support harold , who could then help sweyn against the norwegian king , so these claims should be treated with caution .
although the army and fleet were ready by early august , adverse winds kept the ships in normandy until late september .
his brother tostig and harald hardrada invaded northumbria in september 1066 and defeated the local forces under morcar and edwin at the battle of fulford .
king harold got word of their invasion and marched north , defeating the invaders and killed hardrada on 25 september at the battle of stamford bridge .
after defeating harald hardrada and tostig , harold left much of his army in the north , including morcar and edwin , and marched the rest south to deal with the norman invasion .
he spent about a week on his march south , averaging about 27 mi per day , for the distance of about 200 mi .
the exact events before the battle are obscure , with conflicting accounts in the sources , but all agree that william led his army from his castle and advanced towards the enemy .
harold had taken a defensive position at the top of senlac hillingdon .
although the numbers on each side were about equal , william had both cavalry and infantry , including many archers .
the english soldiers formed a shield wall along the ridge and were at first so effective that william 's army was thrown back with heavy casualties .
some of william 's breton troops panicked and fled .
during the bretons ' flight , rumours went through the norman forces that the duke had been killed .
two further norman retreats were feigned , to once again draw the english into pursuit and expose them to repeated attacks by the norman cavalry .
the available sources are more confused about events in the afternoon , but it appears that the decisive event was harold 's death .
the bayeux tapestry shows that harold 's death by an arrow was later reworking to the tapestry .
william ordered that his body was to be thrown into the sea , but whether that happened is unclear .
william may have hoped the english would surrender following his victory , but they did not .
instead , some of the english clergy and magnates chose edgar the ætheling as king .
william secured dover , parts of kent , and canterbury , while also sending a force to capture winchester , where the royal treasury was .
these captures secured william 's rear areas and also his line of retreat to normandy , if needed .
next he led his forces around the south and west of london , burning along the way .
stigand submitted to william there , and when the duke moved on to berkhamsted soon afterwards , edgar the aetheling , edwin , and ealdred also submitted .
waltheof was married to judith , the daughter of adelaide , and a marriage between edwin and one of william 's daughters was proposed .
he left his half-brother odo , the bishop of bayeux , in charge of england .
although he put two normans in overall charge , he kept many of the native english sheriffs .
while william was in normandy , a former ally , eustace , the count of boulogne , invaded at dover .
english resistance had also begun , with eadric the wild attacking hereford and revolts at exeter .
his sons raiding the southwest of england from a base in ireland .
the chronicler orderic vitalis states that edwin 's reason for revolting was that edwin 's reason for revolting was that the proposed marriage between himself and one of william 's daughters had not taken place , but another reason probably included the increasing power of william fitzosbern in herefordshire , which affected edwin 's power within his own earldom .
william placed supporters in charge of these new fortifications – among them william peverel at nottingham and henry de beaumont at warwick .
although william returned to york and built another castle , edgar remained free .
the danish king had brought a large fleet to england and attacked not only york but exeter and shrewsbury .
william symbolically wore his crown in the ruins of york on christmas day 1069 .
waltheof , who had joined the revolt , submitted , along with gospatric , and both were allowed to keep their lands .
but william was not finished .
this campaign was over by april 1070 , when william wore his crown ceremonially for easter at winchester .
while at winchester in 1070 , william met with three papal legates-john minutus , peter , and ermenfrid of sion .
the historian david bates sees this coronation as the ceremonial papal " seal of approval " for william 's conquest .
some of the native abbots were also deposed , both at the council held near easter and at a further one near whitsun .
thomas of bayeux became the new archbishop of york .
at the end of the process only two english bishops remained in office , with several bishops appointed by edward the confessor .
in 1070 william also founded battle abbey , a new monastery at the site of the battle of hastings .
in spring 1070 , he returned to england and returned to the isle of ely .
william was able to secure the departure of sweyn and his fleet in 1070 .
he was opposed to king william 's power on the continent .
william and malcolm agreed to peace by signing the treaty of abernethy .
another stipulation of the treaty was that edgar the ætheling was expelled from malcolm 's court .
this made william 's power more secure in northern france , but the new count of flanders accepted edgar the ætheling into his court .
william returned to england to release his army from service in 1073 but quickly returned to normandy , where he spent all of 1074 .
he left england in the hands of his supporters , including richard fitzgilbert and william de warenne , as well as lanfranc .
william 's ability to leave england for a whole year was a sign that he felt that his control of the kingdom was secure .
the french king , seeking a focus for those opposed to william 's power , then proposed that edgar be given the castle of montreuil-sur-mer on the channel , which would have given edgar a strategic advantage against william .
in 1075 , when william 's absence , ralph de gael , earl of norfolk , and roger de breteuil , the earl of hereford , conspired to overthrow william in the ' revolt of the earls ' .
roger was a norman , son of william fitzosbern .
ralph 's authority was less than his predecessors in the earldom , and this was probably the cause of his involvement in the revolt .
the exact reason for the rebellion is unclear , but it was launched at the wedding of ralph to a relative of roger , held at exning in suffolk .
another earl , waltheof , the earl of northumbria , was also involved .
ralph was bottled up in norwich castle by the combined efforts of odo of bayeux , geoffrey de montbray , richard fitzgilbert , and william de warenne .
meanwhile , the danish king 's brother , cnut , had finally arrived in england with 200 ships , but he was too late as norwich had surrendered .
william returned to england later in 1075 to deal with the danish threat .
before this , william had returned to the continent , where ralph had continued the rebellion from brittany .
in september 1076 william advanced into brittany and laid siege to the castle .
king philip of france later relieved the siege and defeated william at the battle of dol .
the vexin was a buffer state between normandy and the lands of the french king .
although orderic vitalis describes it as starting with a quarrel between robert and his two younger brothers , william and henry , including a story that the quarrel was started when william and henry threw water at robert , it is much more likely that robert was feeling powerless .
orderic says that he had previously demanded control of maine and normandy and had been rebuffed .
robert left normandy with a band of young men .
this group of young men went to the castle at remalard .
william 's forces were forced to lift the siege , and the king returned to rouen .
by 12 april 1080 william and robert had reached an accommodation .
in august and september 1079 , king malcolm of scots invaded south of the river tweed .
in the spring of 1080 they rebelled against walcher , the bishop of durham and earl of northumbria .
a papal embassy arrived in england during this period , asking that william do fealty for england to the papacy , a request that william rejected .
william also visited wales in 1081 .
william 's biographer david bates argues that the former explanation is more likely .
according to the historian david bates , this probably means that little happened of note , and that because william was on the continent , there was nothing for the anglo-saxon chronicle to record .
orderic also said that odo had tried to persuade some of william 's vassals to join odo on an invasion of southern italy .
odo remained in confinement for the rest of william 's reign .
in 1083 , william 's oldest son robert rebelled against france .
hubert was besieged in his castle at sainte-suzanne .
william 's movements during 1084 and 1085 are unclear : he was in normandy at easter 1084 but may have been in england before then to collect the danegeld assessed that year for the defence of england against an invasion by king cnut iv of denmark .
william ordered many castles , keeps , and mottes built – among them the central keep of the tower of london , the white tower .
these fortifications allowed normans to retreat into safety when threatened with rebellion .
gradually these household knights came to be granted lands of their own .
william also needed his newly created magnates to help build knights towards not only military campaigns but also castle garrisons .
this method of organizing the military forces was a change from the pre-conquest english practice of basing military service on territorial units such as the hide .
by william 's death , after weathering a series of rebellions , most of the native anglo-saxon aristocracy had been replaced by norman and other continental magnates .
some of the newly rich normans in england came from william 's close family or from the upper norman nobility .
william gave some lands to his continental followers from the holdings of one or more specific englishmen .
the medieval chronicler william of malmesbury says that the king also seized and depopulated many miles of landforms .
historians have come to agree that the new forest was very exaggerated .
most of the lands of the new forest are poor agricultural lands .
after 1066 , william did not attempt to integrate his separate domains into one unified realm with one set of laws .
his seal from after 1066 , of which six impressions still survive , was made for him after he conquered england and stressed his role as king , while separately mentioning his role as duke .
in england no such acknowledgment was made .
william took over an english government that was more complex than the norman system .
each shire was administered by a royal official called a sheriff .
to oversee his expanded domain , william was forced to travel even more than he had as duke .
when william was in one part of his realms , decisions would be made for other parts of his domains and transmitted through a communication system that made use of letters and other documents .
this was an advantage for william , as it was the only universal tax collected by western european rulers during this period .
most years saw the rate of two shillings per hide , but in crises , it could be as much as six shillings per hide .
norman coins had a much lower silver content .
he also retained control of much of the lands of harold and his family .
the list gives the holdings of each landholder , grouped by owners .
the listings describe the holding , who owned the land before the conquest , its value , what the tax assessment was , and usually the number of peasants , ploughs , and any other resources the holding had .
all the english counties south of the river tees and river ribble are included .
william 's exact motivation in ordering the survey is unclear , but it probably had several purposes , such as making a record of feudal obligations and justifying increased taxation .
following his arrival back on the continent he married his daughter constance to alan fergant , duke of brittany .
william 's son robert , still allied with the french king , may have been active in stirring up trouble .
orderic vitalis preserves a lengthy account , complete with speeches made by many of the principals , but this is likely more of an account of how a king should die than of what actually happened .
the younger william sent the younger william back to england on 7 or 8 september .
disorder followed william 's death ; everyone who had been at his deathbed left the body at rouen and hurried off to attend to their own affairs .
eventually , the clergy of rouen arranged to have the body sent to caen .
the funeral was attended by the bishops and abbots of normandy as well as his son henry .
after hurried , the allegation was shown to be true , and the man was compensated .
a further indignity occurred when the corpse was lowered into the tomb .
the intact body was restored to the tomb at that time , but in 1562 , during the french wars of religion , the grave was reopened and the bones were lost , with the exception of one thigh bone .
this was reburied in 1642 with a new marker , which was replaced 100 years later with a more elaborate monument .
the tomb was again destroyed during the french revolution .
william then took over control of england and normandy .
even after the younger william 's death in 1100 , his brother henry as king henry remained contested between the brothers until robert 's capture by henry at the battle of tinchebray in 1106 .
the difficulties over the succession led to a loss of authority in normandy .
his sons also lost much of their control over maine .
the conquest brought the kingdom into closer contact with france .
how abrupt and far-reaching were the changes is still a matter of debate among historians .
the historian eleanor searle describes william 's invasion as " a plan that no ruler but a scandinavian would have considered " .
in the years since the conquest , politicians and leaders have used william and the events of his reign to show political events throughout english history .
some historians think william was one of the creators of england 's greatness .
others view william as an enemy of the english constitution .
there is no evidence of any illegitimate children born to william .
