the tuning fork was invented in 1711 by british musician john shore , sergeant trumpeter and lutenist to the court .
the fork shape produces a very pure tone , with most of the vibrational energy at the fundamental frequency .
the reason for this is that the frequency of the first overtone is about = 6 ⁄ times the fundamentalstrel about 2 ⁄ octaves above ithurst .
by comparison , the first overtone of a vibrating string is one octave abovequal twiceosis the fundamental , so when the string is plucked or the bar is struck , its vibrations tend to mix the fundamental and overtone frequencies .
when the tuning fork is struck , little of the energy goes into the overtone modes ; they also die out correspondingly faster , leaving a pure sine wave at the fundamental frequency .
it is also easier to tune other instruments with a pure tone .
another reason for using the fork shape is that , when it vibrates in its principal mode , the handle vibrates up and down as the prongs move apart and together .
there is a node localized point of no vibration spontaneously at the base of each prong .
the handle motion is small , so the user can hold the fork without damping the vibration , but the handle can still transmit the vibration to a resonator , which amplifies the sound of the fork .
the user typically strikes the fork , and then presses the handle against a wooden box resonator , table top , bridge of a musical instrument , or just behind their ear .
string players sometimes use bone conduction , holding the stem of the fork in their teeth , so that both hands are free .
if a sound absorbing sheet is slid in between the prongs of a vibrating fork , reducing the waves reaching the ear from one prong , the volume actually increases , due to a reduction of this cancellation .
orchestras between 1750 and 1820 mostly used a = 423.5 hz , though there were many forks and many slightly different pitches .
tuning forks vibrate at all the notes within the central octave of the piano , and also other pitches .
a change in frequency of 48 parts per million pertyatyatyatyatyatyatyahart is typical for a steel tuning fork .
the pitch of other instruments is also subject to changes with temperature change .
the ratio in the equation above can be rewritten as if the prongs are cylindrical with radius r , and if the prongs have rectangular cross-section of width a along the direction of motion .
the most popular is the rhodes piano , in which hammers hit metal tines that vibrate in the magnetic field of a pickup , creating a signal that drives electric amplification .
the quartz crystal that serves as the timekeeping element in modern quartz clocks and watches is in the form of a tiny tuning fork .
quartz is piezoelectric , so the tines bend rapidly back and forth .
the accutron , an electromechanical watch developed by max hetzel and manufactured by bulova beginning in 1960 , used a 360-hertz steel tuning fork as its timekeeper , powered by a battery-powered transistor oscillator circuit .
george frideric handel made c = 512 .
tuning forks , usually c -512 , are used by doctors to test a patient 's hearing .
lower-pitched ones , usually at c128 , are also used to check vibration sense as part of the examination of the peripheral nervous system .
orthopedic surgeons have explored using a tuning forktify lowest frequency c = 128cope to assess injuries where bone fracture is suspected .
they hold the end of the vibrating fork on the skin above the suspected fracture , progressively closer to the suspected fracture .
if there is a fracture , the periosteum of the bone vibrates , and fire nociceptors ( pain receptors causing a sharp pain .
established practice requires an x-ray regardless , because it 's better than missing a real fracture while wondering if a response means a sprain .
a systematic review in bmj open suggests that this technique is not reliable enough for clinical use .
tuning forks are also used in alternative therapy practices , such as sonopuncture and polarity therapy .
a radar gun is a weapon that measures the speed of cars or a ball in sports is usually calibrated with tuning forks .
instead of the frequency , these forks are labeled with the calibration speed and radar bandication .
the tuning fork is kept vibrating at its resonant frequency by a piezoelectric device .
for liquids , the resonant frequency of tuning fork changes upon coming in contact with the liquids , change in frequency is used to detect level .