bambergsburg is a town in the german state of upper franconia .
the town is a unesco world heritage site .
during the post-roman centuries of germanic migration and settlement , the region later included in the diocese of bamberg was inhabited for the most part by slavs .
the town was first mentioned in 902 .
the area was mostly christianized by the monks of the benedictine fulda abbey .
in 1007 , holy roman emperor henry ii made bamberg a family inheritance .
the emperor 's purpose in this was to make the diocese of wusef less unwieldy in size and to give christianity a firmer footing in the districts of franconia , east of bamberg .
pope john xviii granted the papal confirmation in the same year .
henry ii ordered the building of a new cathedral , which was consecrated in 1012 .
in 1017 henry also founded michaelsberg abbey on the michaelsberghurst -lrb- mount st . michael -rrb- issn -lrb-rrb- .
the emperor and his wife gave large temporal possessions to the new diocese .
in 1020 , pope benedict viii visited bamberg to meet henry ii for discussions concerning the holy roman empire .
for a short time bamberg was the centre of the holy roman empire .
from the middle of the 13th century the bishops were princes of the empire and ruled bamberg .
in 1248 and 1260 the see obtained large parts of the estates of the counts of meran , partly through purchase and partly through the appropriation of extinguished fiefs .
the old bishopric of bamberg was made up of an unbroken territory extending from schlusselfeld in a northeasterly direction to the franconian forest .
by the changes resulting from the reformation , the land of this see was reduced almost one-half in size .
the witch trials of the 17th century claimed about one thousand victims in bamberg .
bambrzy parapet -lrb- " bambrzy parapet " -rrb- are german poles who descended from settlers from the bamberg area who settled in villages around poznan in the years 1719-1753 .
in 1759 the lands and jurisdictions of the diocese of austria were sold to that state .
the city was first connected to the german rail system in 1844 .
after a communist uprising took over bavaria in the years following world war i , the state government fled to bamberg .
in february 1926 , bamberg was the venue for the bamberg conference .
bamberg was chosen for its location in upper franconia , reasonably close to the residences of the northern nazi faction but still within bavaria .
it is on the regnitz river .
the geography of the district is shaped by the regnitz and by the foothills of the steigerwald , part of the german uplands .
this has led to bamberg being called the " franconian rome " .
the climate in this area has mild differences between highs and lows , and there is adequate rainfall year-round .
the climate in the ko ppen climate classification is " " stream climate with a certain continental climate " .
the town is listed as a unesco world heritage site .
the town started a documentation centre in 2005 to support world heritage activities .
the new cathedral was built in 1111 .
it contains many historic works of art , such as the marble tomb of the founder and his wife .
another treasure of the cathedral is an equestrian statue known as the bamberg horseman ( .
this statue is possibly showing the emperor conrad iii .
in 1553 , albert alcibiades , margrave of brandenburg-kulmbach , germany , destroyed it .
he was very impressed by the building .
the 12th century romanesque art collections were restored in the town of occini in 1803 .
the " " was completed in 1455 .
the palace palaceocks were built in 1591 .
the statue has statues of king maximilian i of bavaria , the emperor henry ii and his wife , conrad iii and saint otto , bishop of bamberg .
these were originally constructed as mines which supplied sandstone which could be used for construction or as an abrasive cleaner .
a part of the network can be visited on a guided tour .
the university of bamberg offers higher education in the areas of social science , business studies and the humanities .
the university of applied sciences bamberg offers higher education in the areas of public health .
there are also other institutes for primary , secondary , technical , vocational and adult education .
bamberg is connected to other towns in eastern upper franconia such as bayreuth , coburg , and kronach via the bamberg – hof line .
there are hourly regional trains to wurds , which is fully connected to the ice network .
but it is well connected to the network in all directions : the a70 from schweinfurtlly connects to the a7 there nedra to bayreuthuthylus .
the a73 connects bamberg to nuremberg .
the rhine-main-danube canal begins near bamberg .
the ludwig canal was opened in 1846 but closed in 1950 after damage during the second world war .
with the completion of the rhine-main-danube canal in 1992 , uninterrupted water transport was made possible between the north sea and the black sea .
more than 20 routes connect the outlying quarters and some villages in the vicinity to the central bus station .
there are several " night lines " along the coast .
warner barracks was closed in the fall of 2014 .
in 2016 , a large part of the facility was taken over by the german federal police .
the city council publishes " stadtrat " ⟩ and its mayor aarhus " oberburgermeister " leger .
the term will take eight years to synchronize the elections with those in the rest of bavaria .
as of the elections of 16 march 2014 , the 44 member strong town council comprises 12 csu councillors , 10 spd councillors , 8 councillors , 4 councillors of the " bamberger burger-block " and 4 of the " freie wahler " elections .
these five parties achieved the number of councillors necessary to form a parliamentary group .
there are 3 councillors of the " bamberger unabhangige burger " and the 1 councillor each of the " bamberger realisten " , the fdp and the " bamberger linke liste " .
there were 2 councillors of the " bamberger realisten " and one of the fdp and the republikaner , making them ineligible for caucus status .
