Its name is Latin for "horned goat" or "goat horn" or "having horns like a goat's", and it is commonly represented in the form of a sea-goat: a mythical creature that is half goat, half fish.
Capricornus is one of the 88 modern constellations, and was also one of the 48 constellations listed by the 2nd century astronomer Claudius Ptolemy.
The constellation is located in an area of sky called the Sea or the Water, consisting of many water-related constellations such as Aquarius, Pisces and Eridanus.
Capricornus is a faint constellation, with only one star above magnitude 3; its alpha star has a magnitude of only 3.6 .
The brightest star in Capricornus is δ Capricorni, also called Deneb Algedi, with a magnitude of 2.9, located 39 light-years from Earth.
Like several other stars such as Denebola and Deneb, it is named for the Arabic word for "tail" ("deneb"); its traditional name means "the tail of the goat".
The primary (α Cap), 109 light-years from Earth, is a yellow-hued giant star of magnitude 3.6; the secondary (α Cap), 690 light-years from Earth, is a yellow-hued supergiant star of magnitude 4.3 .
Also called Algedi or Giedi, the traditional names of α Capricorni come from the Arabic word for "the kid", which references the constellation's mythology.
The secondary is a blue-white hued star of magnitude 6.1 .
β Capricorni's traditional name comes from the Arabic phrase for "the lucky stars of the slaughterer," a reference to ritual sacrifices performed by ancient Arabs at the heliacal rising of Capricornus.
Another star visible to the naked eye is γ Capricorni, sometimes called Nashira ("bringing good tidings"); it is a white-hued giant star of magnitude 3.7, 139 light-years from Earth.
π Capricorni is a double star with a blue-white hued primary of magnitude 5.1 and a white-hued secondary of magnitude 8.3 .
It is 670 light-years from Earth and the components are distinguishable in a small telescope.
At a distance of 30,000 light-years, it has chains of stars extending to the north that are resolvable in small amateur telescopes.
One galaxy group located in Capricornus is HCG 87, a group of at least three galaxies located 400 million light-years from Earth (redshift 0.0296).
The face-on spiral galaxy is experiencing abnormally high rates of star formation, indicating that it is interacting with one or both members of the group.
Furthermore, the large elliptical galaxy and the edge-on spiral galaxy, both of which have active nuclei, are connected by a stream of stars and dust, indicating that they too are interacting.
Astronomers predict that the three galaxies may merge millions of years in the future to form a giant elliptical galaxy.
The constellation was first attested in depictions on a cylinder-seal from around the 21st century BCE, it was explicitly recorded in the Babylonian star catalogues before 1000 BCE.
In the Early Bronze Age the winter solstice occurred in the constellation, but due to the precession of the equinoxes, the December solstice now takes place in the constellation Sagittarius.
The Sun is now in the constellation Capricorn (as distinct from the astrological sign) from late January through mid-February.
Although the solstice during the northern hemisphere's winter no longer takes place while the sun is in the "constellation" Capricornus, as it did until 130 BCE, the "astrological sign" called Capricorn is still used to denote the position of the solstice, and the latitude of the sun's most southerly position continues to be called the "Tropic of Capricorn", a term which also applies to the line on the Earth at which the sun is directly overhead at local noon on the day of the December solstice.
The planet Neptune was discovered by German astronomer Johann Galle, near Deneb Algedi (δ Capricorni) on 23 September 1846, as Capricornus can be seen best from Europe at 4:00 in September (although, by modern constellation boundaries established in the early 20th century CE, Neptune lay within the confines of Aquarius at the time of its discovery).
Despite its faintness, the constellation Capricornus has one of the oldest mythological associations, having been consistently represented as a hybrid of a goat and a fish since the Middle Bronze Age, when the Babylonians used "The Goat-Fish" as a symbol of their god Ea.
In Greek mythology, the constellation is sometimes identified as Amalthea, the goat that suckled the infant Zeus after his mother, Rhea, saved him from being devoured by his father, Cronos.
According to some ancient Greek myths, it started with the sea-goat Pricus.
Pricus is tied to Chronos, the god of time in Greek myths.
Chronos created the immortal Pricus, who shares Chronos's ability to manipulate time.
He had lots of children who lived near the seashore, however, when they found themselves on the dry land they turned into normal goats, losing their special ability to think and speak in the process.
In an effort to prevent this, Pricus turns back time, again and again; however, he eventually resigns himself to loneliness and misery, letting the little Sea Goats leave him.
Learning he cannot control their fate and not wanting to be the only Sea Goat prompts him to ask Chronos to let him die.
Because he is immortal instead, he must spend eternity in the sky as Capricorn.
Capricornus is also sometimes identified as Pan, the god with a goat's head, who saved himself from the monster Typhon by giving himself a fish's tail and diving into a river.
Ptolemy's method of connecting the stars of Capricornus has been influential.
In Chinese astronomy, constellation Capricornus lies in "The Black Tortoise of the North" (北方玄武, "Běi Fāng Xuán Wǔ").