paolo uccello grumbled , biennial , 1397 – december 10,1475 naples , italy , was a florentine painter and mathematician .
giorgio vasari wrote that uccello was obsessed by his interest in perspective and would stay up all night in his study .
while his contemporaries used perspective to narrate different or succeeding stories , uccello used perspective to create a feeling of depth in his paintings .
his best known works are the three paintings representing the battle of san romano , which were wrongly entitled the battle of sant ' egidio of 1416 " for a long period of time .
paolo worked in the late gothic tradition .
his style is best described as idiosyncratic , and he left no school of followers .
he had some influence on twentieth-century art and literary criticism .
giorgio vasari wrote about 75 years after paolo 's death .
due to the lack of sources , even his date of birth is questionable .
uccello was born in pratovecchio in 1397 .
his father , dono di paolo , was a barber-surgeon from pratovecchio near arezzo .
his nickname " uccello " came from his fondness for painting birds .
from 1412 until 1416 he was apprenticed to the famous sculptor lorenzo ghiberti .
ghiberti was the designer of the doors of the florence baptistery and his workshop was the main centre for florentine art at the time .
ghiberti 's late-gothic , narrative style and sculptural composition greatly influenced paolo .
around this time paolo began to have a long life-long relationship with donatello .
in 1414 uccello was a member of the painters ' guild , " compagnia di san luca " .
uccello probably left ghiberti 's workshop by the mid 1420s .
the scene was influenced by " the battle of san romano " .
vasari said that uccello ’ s first painting was a saint anthony between the saints cosmas and damianus , a commission for the hospital of lelmo .
he painted two figures in the convent of annalena .
he painted three frescoes of the life of st . francis .
for the santa maria maggiore church , he painted a fresco of the annunciation .
in this fresco , he painted a large building with columns in perspective .
vasari said that this was a great and beautiful achievement .
as a result , this work became a model for artists who wished to craft illusions of space in order to enhance the realness of their paintings .
paolo painted " the lives of the church fathers " in the cloisters of the church of san miniato , which sat on a hill overlooking florence .
paolo then returned to finish the job only after the abbot promised him a more varied diet .
uccello was asked to paint a number of scenes of distempered animals for the house of the medici .
vasari said that he saw a fierce lion fighting with a venom-spouting snake .
uccello loved to paint animals and he kept pictures of animals , especially birds .
this love for birds is what led to his nickname , paolo uccelliwyl paul of the birdsrford .
by 1424 , paolo was earning his own living as a painter .
in that year , he showed his artistic maturity by painting episodes of the " creation and expulsion " , which are now badly damaged , for the green cloistermind " chiostro verde "nsensense in florence .
again , this assignment allowed him to paint a large number of animals in a lively manner .
he also painted trees in their natural colours .
this was difficult for many of his predecessors , so uccello also began to get a reputation for painting .
he continued with scenes from the deluge , the story of noah 's ark , noah 's sacrifice and noah 's drunkenness .
these scenes brought him great fame in florence .
in 1425 uccello went to venice where he lived for the mosaics for the " facade of san marco " .
during this time , he also painted frescoes in the prato cathedral and bologna .
some say he visited rome with his friend donatello .
after he returned uccello stayed in florence for most of his life , executing works for churches and patrons , most notably the duomo .
despite his leave from florence , interest in uccello did not diminish .
in 1432 , the office of works asked the florentine ambassador in venice to enquire .
in 1436 , he was given the commission for the monochromatic fresco of " sir john hawkwood " .
this equestrian monument was very interested in perspective .
the condottiere and his horse are shown as if the fresco was a sculpture seen from below .
he is probably the author of the frescoes " stories of the virgin " and " story of st stephen " in the cappella dell ' assunta , florence .
later , in 1443 , he painted the figures on the clock of the duomo .
in that same year and continuing into 1444 , he designed a few stained glass windows for the same church .
in 1444 he was also at work in padua .
back in florence in 1446 , he painted the " green stations of the cross " , again for the cloister of the church santa maria novella .
he painted scenes of monastic life for the church of san miniato , florence .
around the mid-1450s , he painted his three most famous paintings .
the extraordinarily foreshortened forms extending in many planes accentuate uccello 's virtuosity as a draftsman , and provides a controlled visual structure to the chaos of the battle scene .
by 1453 uccello was married to tomassa malifici .
this is known because in that year donatographs named after donatello gundam , was born .
in 1456 , his wife gave birth to their daughter , antonia .
giorgio vasari called him " a daughter who knew how to draw . "
she was even noted as a " pittoressa " , a painter , on her death certificate .
her style and her skill is a mystery as none of her work is still extant .
from 1465 to 1469 uccello was in urbino with his son donato .
during this time , he painted the predella for their new altarpiece with the " miracle of the profaned host " .
the main panel representing the " communion of the apostles " was commissioned to justus van ghent and finished in 1474 c1 .
uccello 's predella is composed of six scenes from the myth of host desecration .
it has been suggested that the subject of the main panel , on which duke frederick of montefeltro of urbino appears in the background conversing with an asian , is related to the antisemitic intention of the predella .
however , federico did allow a small jewish community to live in urbino .
in 1469 uccello said , “ i find myself old and ailing , my wife is ill , and i can no longer work . ”
paolo was a lonesome and forgotten man who was afraid of hardship in life .
his last known work is " the hunt " , about 1470 .
he died on 10 november 1475 , in florence , italy from a heart attack , aged 78 .
he was buried in his father ’ s tomb in the church of santo spirito .
with his precise and analytical mind , paolo uccello tried to use a scientific method to show objects in three dimensional space .
one standard display of drawing skill was his depiction of the mazzocchio .
in the words of g . c . argan : " paolo 's rigour is similar to the rigour of cubists in the early 20th century , whose images were less true to life .
paolo constructs space through perspective , and historic event through the structure of space .
the painting in his paintings has influenced many famous painters , such as piero della francesca , albrecht durer and leonardo da vinci .
pope hennessy is far more conservative than the italian authors : he attributes some of the works below to a " prato master " and a " karlsruhe master " .
most of the dates in the listhord come from borsi and borsiþ .
