giorgio vasari wrote that uccello was obsessed by his interest in perspective and would stay up all night in his study .
his best known works are the three paintings representing the battle of san romano , which were wrongly entitled the battle of sant ' egidio of 1416 " for a long period of time .
paolo worked in the late gothic tradition .
his style is best described as idiosyncratic , and he left no school of followers .
due to the lack of sources , even his date of birth is questionable .
uccello was born in pratovecchio in 1397 .
his father , dono di paolo , was a barber-surgeon from pratovecchio near arezzo .
ghiberti was the designer of the doors of the florence baptistery and his workshop was the main centre for florentine art at the time .
the scene was influenced by " the battle of san romano " .
vasari said that uccello ’ s first painting was a saint anthony between the saints cosmas and damianus , a commission for the hospital of lelmo .
for the santa maria maggiore church , he painted a fresco of the annunciation .
in this fresco , he painted a large building with columns in perspective .
vasari said that this was a great and beautiful achievement .
as a result , this work became a model for artists who wished to craft illusions of space in order to enhance the realness of their paintings .
paolo painted " the lives of the church fathers " in the cloisters of the church of san miniato , which sat on a hill overlooking florence .
paolo then returned to finish the job only after the abbot promised him a more varied diet .
uccello was asked to paint a number of scenes of distempered animals for the house of the medici .
in that year , he showed his artistic maturity by painting episodes of the " creation and expulsion " , which are now badly damaged , for the green cloistermind " chiostro verde "nsensense in florence .
this was difficult for many of his predecessors , so uccello also began to get a reputation for painting .
he continued with scenes from the deluge , the story of noah 's ark , noah 's sacrifice and noah 's drunkenness .
in 1425 uccello went to venice where he lived for the mosaics for the " facade of san marco " .
during this time , he also painted frescoes in the prato cathedral and bologna .
after he returned uccello stayed in florence for most of his life , executing works for churches and patrons , most notably the duomo .
despite his leave from florence , interest in uccello did not diminish .
the condottiere and his horse are shown as if the fresco was a sculpture seen from below .
he is probably the author of the frescoes " stories of the virgin " and " story of st stephen " in the cappella dell ' assunta , florence .
later , in 1443 , he painted the figures on the clock of the duomo .
in that same year and continuing into 1444 , he designed a few stained glass windows for the same church .
back in florence in 1446 , he painted the " green stations of the cross " , again for the cloister of the church santa maria novella .
the extraordinarily foreshortened forms extending in many planes accentuate uccello 's virtuosity as a draftsman , and provides a controlled visual structure to the chaos of the battle scene .
this is known because in that year donatographs named after donatello gundam , was born .
she was even noted as a " pittoressa " , a painter , on her death certificate .
her style and her skill is a mystery as none of her work is still extant .
during this time , he painted the predella for their new altarpiece with the " miracle of the profaned host " .
it has been suggested that the subject of the main panel , on which duke frederick of montefeltro of urbino appears in the background conversing with an asian , is related to the antisemitic intention of the predella .
his last known work is " the hunt " , about 1470 .
he died on 10 november 1475 , in florence , italy from a heart attack , aged 78 .
he was buried in his father ’ s tomb in the church of santo spirito .
with his precise and analytical mind , paolo uccello tried to use a scientific method to show objects in three dimensional space .
in the words of g . c . argan : " paolo 's rigour is similar to the rigour of cubists in the early 20th century , whose images were less true to life .
the painting in his paintings has influenced many famous painters , such as piero della francesca , albrecht durer and leonardo da vinci .
pope hennessy is far more conservative than the italian authors : he attributes some of the works below to a " prato master " and a " karlsruhe master " .