a blizzard is a severe snowstorm .
blizzards can have a very large size .
in the united states , the national weather service says that a blizzard is a severe snow storm .
a blizzard is the difference between a snowstorm and a snowstorm .
to be a blizzard , a snow storm must have sustained winds or frequent gusts that are greater than or equal to 56 km / h with blowing or drifting snow which reduces visibility to 400 m or less .
while severe cold and large amounts of drifting snow may accompany blizzards , they are not required .
in antarctica , blizzards are associated with winds spilling over the edge of the ice plateau at an average velocity of 160 km / h .
a blizzard is a condition where snow or ice on the ground is lifted and blown by strong winds .
the main difference between a ground blizzard and a regular blizzard is that in a ground blizzard no precipitation is produced at the time , but rather all the precipitation is already present in the form of snow or ice at the surface .
the australia bureau of meteorology says that a blizzard was " violent and very cold wind which is laden with snow , some part , at least , of which has been raised from snow covered . "
the oxford english dictionary suggests the term " blizzard " is likely onomatopoeic , derived from the same sense as " blow , blast , blister , and bluster " .
when cold , moist air moves eastward to the rocky mountains and the great plains , and warmer , moist air moves north from the gulf of mexico .
another storm system is when a cold core low over the hudson bay area in canada is moved southward over southeastern canada , the great lakes , and new england .
low pressure systems moving out of the rocky mountains onto the great plains , a wide area of flat land , can cause thunderstorms and rain to the south and heavy snows and strong winds to the north .
with few trees or other obstructions to reduce wind and blowing , this part of the country is vulnerable to blizzards with very low temperatures and whiteout conditions .
people can become lost in their own front yards , when the door is only 10 ft away , and they would have to feel their way back .
it gets its name from the direction the wind is coming from .
it describes a low-pressure area whose center of rotation is just off the coast .
it dropped 40-of snow and had sustained winds of more than 45 mph .
railroads were closed down .
many children and their parents learned of " the snow winter " through the children 's book " the long winter " by laura ingalls wilder .
this made the tracks too hard , the near-starvation of the townspeople , and the courage of her future husband almanzo and another man , who came out on the open prairie of wheat that was even sure in search of a cache of wheat that was even sure .
the october blizzard brought snowfalls so deep that two-story homes had snow up to the second floor windows .
no one was prepared for the deep snow so early in the season .
by january the train service was almost entirely suspended from the region .
railroads hired many men to dig out the tracks but it was a wasted effort : as soon as they had finished shoveling a stretch of line , a new storm arrived , filling up the line and leaving their work useless .
there were no winter thaws .
in the towns the streets were filled with solid drifts to the tops of the buildings and tunneling was needed to secure passage about town .
the storm of the century was a very big storm that formed over the gulf of mexico on march 12,1993 .
at its height , the storm stretched from canada towards central america , but its main impact was on the united states and cuba .
areas as far south as northern alabama and georgia received a dusting of snow and areas such as birmingham , alabama , received up to 12 inches -lrb- 7.7 in -rrb- with hurricane-force wind gusts and record low barometric pressures .
between louisiana and cuba , hurricane-force winds produced high storm surges across northwestern florida .
in the united states , the storm was responsible for the loss of electricity to over 10 million customers .
