in evolutionary biology , adaptive radiation is a process in which organisms diversify rapidly from an ancestral species into a multitude of new forms , particularly when a change in the environment makes new resources available , creates new challenges , or opens new environmental niches .
starting with a recent single ancestor , this process results in the speciation and phenotypic adaptation of an array of species showing different morphological and physiological traits .
the prototypical example of adaptive radiation is finch speciation on the galapagosaurus " darwin 's finches "dilly line .
darwin 's finches are a textbook example of adaptive radiation .
today , darwin 's finches are galapagos endemics .
darwin 's finches are not actually finches in the true sense , but are members of the tanager family thraupidae .
excluding the cocos finch , each species of darwin 's finch lives in the galapagos .
they have thick bills to help the consumption of these hard materials .
the ground finches are further specialized to eat seeds of a particular size : the large ground finchulatorygmies " geospiza magnirostris " is the largest species of darwin 's finch .
for example , the most robust medium ground finches could have beaks larger than those of the smallest large ground finches .
because of this overlap , it can be difficult to tell the species apart by eye , though their songs differ .
these three species often occur sympatrically , and during the rainy season in the gala pagos when food is plentiful , they specialize little and eat the same , easily accessible foods .
it was not well-understood why their beaks were so adapted until peter and rosemary grant studied their feeding behavior in the long dry season .
the other finches in the gala pagos are uniquely adapted for their particular niche .
the cactus fincheschaft " geospiza " sp . pollen has somewhat longer beaks than the ground finches .
the warbler-finches numbered " certhidea " sp . foley have short , pointed beaks for eating insects .
the woodpecker finchleton " camarhynchus pallidus " prints a slender beak which it uses to pick at wood in search of insects .
the mechanism by which the finches first diversified is still an area of active research .
one theory is that the finches were able to have a non-adaptive , allopatric speciation event on separate islands in the archipelago , such that when they reconverged on some islands , they were able to maintain reproductive isolation .
once they occurred in sympatry , niche specialization was favored so that the different species competed less directly for resources .
this second sympatric event was adaptive radiation .
the haplochromine cichlid fishes in the great lakes of the east african rift zone are the most speciose modern example of adaptive radiation .
these lakes are believed to be home to about 2,000 different species of cichlid .
cichlids in these lakes fill nearly all of the roles typically filled by a large number of fish families , including those of predators , scavengers , and herbivores , with varying dentitions and head shapes to match their dietary habits .
in each case , the radiation events are only a few million years old , making the very high level of speciation remarkable .
several factors could be responsible for this diversity : the availability of a multitude of niches probably favored specialization , as few other fish taxa are present in the lakes .
also , continual changes in the water level of the lakes during the pleistocene epoch which often turned the largest lakes into several smaller oneshend could have created the conditions for secondary allopatric speciation .
lake tanganyika is the site from which nearly all the cichlid lineages of east africa belonged to both riverine and lake speciestock originated .
they do not form a single single clade .
lake tanganyika is the least speciose of the three largest african great lakes .
lake tanganyika is believed to have formed 9 – 12 million years ago .
many of tanganyika 's cichlids live very specialized lifestyles .
the giant or emperor cichlidium cichlidlidomists " boulengerochromis microlepis " turkmenistan is a piscivore .
giant cichlids spawn only a single time , breeding in their third year and defending their young until they reach a large size , before dying of starvation some time after .
the three species of " altolamprologus " are also piscivores , but with laterally compressed bodies and thick scales enabling them to chase prey into thin cracks in rocks without damaging their skin .
" plecodus straeleni " has evolved large , strangely curved teeth that are designed to scrape scales off of the sides of other fish .
" gnathochromis permaxillaris " has a large mouth with a protruding upper lip , and feeds by opening this mouth downward onto the sandy lake bottom , sucking in small invertebrates .
a number of tanganyika 's cichlids are shell-brooders .
" lamprologus callipterus " is the most unique egg-brooding species , with 15 cm-long males amassing collections of shells and guarding them in the hopes of attracting females ashore about 6 cm in lengtheux to lay eggs in these shells .
these dominant males must defend their territories from three types of rival : : — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — —
these dwarf males never grow to the size of dominant males .
a number of other highly specialized tanganyika cichlids exist .
the cichlids of lake malawi make up to 1000 endemic species .
only seven cichlid species in lake malawi are not a part of the species flock : the eastern happy [mask] " astatotilapia calliptera " graph , the sungwaitung , and five tilapia species species species species are oreochromis and coptodontodon .
all of the other cichlids in the lake are descendants of a single original colonist species , which itself was descended from tanganyikan ancestors .
the common ancestor of malawi 's species flock is believed to have reached the lake 3.4 million years ago at the earliest , making malawi cichlids ' diversification into their present numbers .
malawi 's cichlids span a similarly range of feeding behaviors to those of tanganyika , but also show signs of a much more recent origin .
for example , all members of the malawi species are mouth-brooders , meaning the female keeps her eggs in her mouth until they hatch .
males of most species have blue colour when mating .
however , a number of particularly divergent species are known from malawi .
lake victoria 's cichlids are also a species flock , once made of some 500 or more species .
the deliberate introduction of the nile perchmouth " lates niloticus "arth in the 1950s proved disastrous for victoria cichlids .
however , the original range of morphological and behavioral diversity seen in the lake 's cichlid fauna is still mostly present today , if endangered .
again , there are standouts .
victoria is home to a large number of piscivorous species , some of which feed by sucking the contents out of mouth-like females ' mouths .
the age of the flock is from 200,000 years to as little as 14,000 .
hawaii has been the site of a number of adaptive radiation events .
the three most famous example of these radiations are presented below .
the hawaiian honeycreepers form a large , diverse species group that began radiating in the early days of the hawaiian archipelago .
while today only 17 species are known to exist in hawaiilania , hawaii may or may not be extinct .
the hawaiian honeycreepers are known for their beaks , which are specialized to satisfy a wide range of dietary needs .
meanwhile , the ʻiʻiwitness " drepanis coccinea " prints a very long curved beak for reaching nectar deep in " lobelia " flowers .
the whole group of hawaiian honeycreepers , the tribe psittirostrini , is made of thick-billed , mostly seed-eating birds , like the laysan finchilly .
in at least some cases , similar morphologies and behaviors appear to have evolved convergently among the hawaiian honeycreepers .
the hawaiian honeycreepers are believed to have descended from a single common ancestor some 15 to 20 million years ago , though estimates range as low as 3.5 million years .
adaptive radiation is not a strictly vertebrate phenomenon , and an example is also known from among plants .
the most famous example of adaptive radiation in plants is the hawaiian silverswords .
the hawaiian silversword alliance includes 20 species of hawaiian plants .
the silversword alliance is believed to have originated in hawaii no more than 6 million years ago .
this means that the silverswords evolved on hawaii 's modern high islands .
the closest relative of the silverswords today are california tarweeds of the family asteraceae .
hawaii is also the site of a major major floral adaptive radiation event .
they descended from a single common ancestor who arrived in the archipelago up to 15 million years ago .
today the hawaiian lobelioids form a clade of over 125 species , including succulents , trees , shrubs , epiphytes , etc .
many of the species have been lost to extinction .
they are found in the new world , from the southeastern us to south america .
with over 400 species , often placed in a single genus commits " anolis " foley , they constitute one of the largest radiation events among all lizards .
anole radiation on the mainland has largely been a process of speciation , and is not adaptive to any great degree .
on each of these islands , anoles have evolved with such a consistent set of morphological adaptations that each species can be assigned to one of six " ecomorphs " : trunk-ground , trunk-crown , grass-bush , crown-giant , twig , and trunk .
for example , crown-giants from each of these islands : the cuban " anolis luteogularis " , hispaniola 's " anolis cuvieri " , puerto rico 's " anolis cuvieri " , and jamaica 's " anolis garmani " cuba and hispaniola are both home to more than one species of crown .
these anoles are all large , canopy-dwelling species with large heads and large lamellae ( scales on the undersides of the fingers and toes that are important for traction in climbing climbing climbing .
the same is said to be of the other five ecomorphs across the caribbean 's four largest islands .
each of these islands is home to its own convergent " anolis " adaptive radiation event .
presented above are the most well-documented examples of modern adaptive radiation , but other examples are known .
on madagascar , birds of the family vangidae have very distinct beak shapes to suit their ecological roles .
the brightly colored mantellashyllum " mantella " invented the neotropical poison dart frogs of dendrobatidae .
the pseudoxyrhophiines of madagascar have evolved into fossorial , arboreal , terrestrial , and semi-aquatic forms that converge with the colubroid faunas in the rest of the world .
these madagascan examples are significantly older than most of the other examples presented here : madagascar 's fauna has been evolving in isolation since the island split from india some 88 million years ago , and the mantellidae originated around 50 mya .
the k-pg extinction event , which caused the disappearance of the dinosaurs and most other reptilian megafauna 65 million years ago , is seen as having triggered a global adaptive radiation event that created the mammal diversity that exists today .
