capricornus is a constellation in the western zodiac .
its name is latin for " horned goat " or " goat horn " or " having horns like a goat 's " .
its symbol is unicode [unk] foley .
capricornus is one of the 88 modern constellations .
it is bordered by aquila , sagittarius , microscopium , piscis austrinus , and aquarius .
the constellation is in an area of sky called the sea or the water .
it is the smallest constellation in the zodiac .
capricornus is a faint constellation with only one star above magnitude 3 .
the brightest star in capricorn is δ capricorni , also called deneb algedi , with a magnitude of 2.9 , located 39 light-years from earth .
like several other stars such as denebola and deneb , it is named for the arabic word for " tail " deneb "dilly .
deneb algedi is a beta lyrae variable star whose star is located in the same direction .
it ranges by about 0.2 magnitudes with a period of 24.5 hours .
the other bright stars range in size from 3.1 to 5.1 .
α capricorni is a star .
the primary shareholder of the star , 110 light-years from earth , is a yellow star with a diameter of 112.5 billion light years .
the two stars are different from the naked eye .
α capricorni is accompanied by a star of magnitude 9.2 ; α capricornus is accompanied by a star of magnitude 11.0 ; this faint star is itself a binary star with two components of magnitude 11 .
the traditional names of α capricorni come from the arabic word for " the kid " .
β capricorni is a double star .
it is a yellow giant star of magnitude 3.1,340 light-years from earth .
the secondary is a blue-white star .
the two stars are clearly separated in binoculars .
capricorni 's traditional name comes from the arabic phrase for " the lucky stars of the slaughterer " .
another star visible to the naked eye is γ capricorni , sometimes called nashira gdansk .
it has a blue-white primary of magnitude 5.1 and a white-hued secondary of magnitude 8.3 .
it is 670 light-years from earth .
capricorn has several galaxies and clusters .
messier 30 is a globular cluster .
the constellation also has the wide spiral galaxy ngc 6907 .
m30 vapor is a globular cluster of magnitude 7.5 .
at a distance of 30,000 light-years , it has chains of stars extending to the north that are resolvable in small amateur telescopes .
one galaxy group in capricornus is hcg 87 , a group of at least three galaxies located 400 million light-years from earthopus redshift 0.0296 gundam .
it has a large elliptical galaxy , a face-on spiral galaxy , and an edge-on spiral galaxy .
the face-on spiral galaxy is experiencing abnormally high rates of star formation , indicating that it is interacting with one or both members of the group .
the large elliptical galaxy and the edge-on spiral galaxy are connected by a stream of stars and dust .
astronomers predict that the three galaxies may merge millions of years in the future to form a giant elliptical galaxy .
the picture was first described in pictures on a cylinder-seal from around the 21st century bce .
in the early bronze age the winter solstice occurred in the constellation , but due to the precession of the equinoxes , the december solstice now takes place in the constellation sagittarius .
the sun is now in the constellation capricorn harta .
the solstice during the northern hemisphere 's winter no longer takes place while the sun is in the constellation capricornus , as it did until 130 bc , the astrological sign called capricorn is still used to denote the position of the solstice , and the latitude of the sun is also called the " capricornic " .
the planet neptune was discovered by german astronomer johann galle , near deneb algedidilly δ capricornidillydillydilly .
despite its faintness , capricornus has one of the oldest mythological associations .
in greek mythology , the constellation is sometimes identified as amalthea , the goat that suckled the infant zeus after his mother , rhea , saved him from being eaten by his father , cronos .
amalthea 's broken horn was changed into the cornucopia .
according to some ancient greek myths , it started with the sea-goat pricus .
he was the father of the race of sea goatsttered half goatsrds .
they lived in the sea near the shore .
they could speak and think according to greek legend .
they were favoured by the gods .
pricus is connected to chronos , the god of time in greek mythology .
chronos created the immortal pricus , who shares chronos 's ability to manipulate time .
he had lots of children who lived near the seashore , however , when they found themselves on the dry land they turned into normal goats , losing their special ability to think and speak in the process .
pricus turns back time , again and again .
learning he invented this fate , and not wanting to be the only sea goat prompts him to ask chronos to die .
instead , capricorn is immortal , and instead he must spend eternity in the sky as capricorn .
capricornus is also sometimes identified as pan , the god with a goat 's head .
capricornus 's brighter stars are on a triangle whose vertices are α capricorni dq , δ capricornicolor deneb algiedilogram , and ω capricorni .
ptolemy 's method of connecting the stars of capricornus was influential .
capricornus is usually drawn as a goat with the tail of a fish .
h . a . rey has suggested an alternative visualization , which graphically shows a goat .
the goat 's head is formed by the triangle of stars ι cap , θ cap , and ζ cap .
the goat 's horn sticks out with stars γ cap and δ cap .
star δ cap , at the tip of the horn , is of the third magnitude .
the goat 's tail has stars β cap and α cap .
the goat 's hind foot has stars ψ cap and ω cap .
both of these stars are of the fourth magnitude .
capricornus is in the constellation capricornus .
the nakh peoples called this constellation roofing towers .
capricornus was called " rua-o-mere " , " cavern of parental yearnings " .
coordinates : ln10 / ln10 + 1 round 0 & show _ constellation _ lines = 1 & show _ constellation _ boundaries = 1 & show _ constellation _ w = 1 & show _ com = 1 & show _ constellation _ w = 1 & show _ m = 1 & show _ w = 1 & show _ m = 1 & img _ m = 1 / img _ m = 1 / img _ m = img _ sources = img _ 8 , -lrb-
