a cartoon is a drawing .
the specific meaning has evolved over time , but the modern usage usually refers to either : an image or series of images intended for satire , caricature , or humor ; or a motion picture that relies on a sequence of illustrations for its animation .
someone who makes cartoons in the first sense is called a " cartoonist " .
the concept originated in the middle ages .
in the 19th century , cartoon came to refer-ironically at first-to humorous illustrations in magazines and newspapers .
in the early 20th century , it began to refer to animated movies which resembled print cartoons .
a cartoonhesis from and — words describing strong , heavy paper or pasteboardboardboardboard jumpers is a full-size drawing made on sturdy paper as a study or " modello " for a painting , stained glass , or tapestry .
cartoons were often used in the making of frescoes .
such cartoons often have pinpricks along the outlines of the design so that a bag of soottively or " pounced " over a cartoon , held against the wall , would leave black dots on the plaster plaster plasterers .
cartoons by painters , such as the raphael cartoons in london , and examples by leonardo da vinci , are highly prized in their own right .
tapestry cartoons , usually colored , were followed with the eye by the weavers on the loom .
a cartoon is a series of drawings that are usually humorous in intent .
this was when " punch " magazine applied the term to satirical drawings in its pages , especially sketches by john leech .
the first of these parodied the preparatory cartoons for grand historical frescoes in the then-new palace of westminster .
the original title for these drawings was " mr punch 's face is the letter q " and the new title " cartoon " was meant to be ironic , a reference to the self-aggrandizing posturing of westminster politicians .
cartoon cartoons can be divided into comic strips .
most of the stories are a single drawing with a kindet caption beneath , or — less often — a speech balloon .
newspaper syndicates have also distributed single-panel cartoons by mel calman , bill holman , gary larson , george lichty , fred neher and others .
many consider " new yorker " cartoonist peter arno the father of the modern gagisi cartoonist cartoon strips as did arno himself reeling .
the magazine gag cartoonists include charles addams , charles barsotti , and chon day .
partch began as magazine gag cartoonists and moved to syndicated comic strips .
richard thompson illustrated many feature articles in " the washington post " before creating his " cul de sac " comic strip .
the sports section of newspapers usually featured cartoons .
" editorial cartoons " are found in news publications and news websites .
they are more serious in tone , usually using irony or satire .
the art is a visual metaphor to show a point of view on current social or political topics .
editorial cartoons often include speech balloons and sometimes use multiple panels .
editorial cartoonists of note include herblock , david low , jeff macnelly , mike peters , and gerald scarfe .
comic strips are a series of cartoon drawings in sequence .
in the united states , cartoons are not commonly called " cartoons " themselves , but rather " comics " or " funnies " .
nonetheless , the creators of comic strips — as well as comic books and graphic novels — are usually referred to as " cartoonists " .
humor is the most prevalent subject matter , adventure and drama are also represented in this medium .
some famous cartoonists of humorous comic strips are scott adams , steve bell , charles schulz , e . c . segar , mort walker and bill watterson .
political cartoons are like illustrated editorials that serve visual commentaries on political events .
they offer subtle criticism which are quoted with satire to the extent that the criticized does not get embittered .
the pictorial satire of william hogarth is regarded as a precursor to the development of political cartoons in 18th century england .
george townshend produced some of the first overtly political cartoons and caricatures in the 1750s .
the medium began to develop in the latter part of the 18th century .
gillray explored the use of the medium for lampooning and caricature .
by calling the king , prime ministers and generals to account for their behaviour , many of gillray 's satires were directed against george iii .
george cruikshank became the leading cartoonist in the period after gillray , from 1815 until the 1840s .
his career was renowned for his social caricatures of english life for popular publications .
by the mid-1800s , major political newspapers in many other countries had cartoons commenting on the politics of the day .
thomas nast , in new york city , showed how realistic german drawing techniques could redefine american cartooning .
his 160 cartoons continued the tweed machine in new york city .
tweed was arrested in spain when police identified him from nast 's cartoons .
in britain , sir john tenniel was the toast of london .
in france under the july monarchy , honore daumier took up the new genre of political and social caricature .
political cartoons can be humorous or satirical .
the target of the humor may complain , but can seldom fight back .
lawsuits have been very rare ; the first successful lawsuit against a cartoonist in over a century in britain came in 1921 , when j . h . thomas , the leader of the national union of railwaymentify nurnberger , initiated libel proceedings against the magazine of the british communist party .
thomas claimed defamation in the form of cartoons and words depicting the events of " black friday " , when he allegedly betrayed the miners ' federation .
to thomas , the framing of his image threatened to grievously degrade his character in the popular imagination .
soviet-inspired communism was a new element in european politics .
thomas won the lawsuit and restored his reputation .
cartoons such as " xkcd " have also found their place in the world of science , mathematics , and technology .
for example , the cartoon " wonderlab " looked at daily life in the chemistry lab .
in the u . s . , one well-known cartoonist for these fields is sidney harris .
many of gary larson 's cartoons have a scientific flavor .
books with cartoons are usually magazine-format comic books , or sometimes reprints of newspaper cartoons .
in britain in the 1930s adventure magazines became very popular .
the story line in magazines , comic books and cinema that most liked boys was the heroism of british soldiers fighting wars that were exciting and just .
thomson issued the first dandy comic in december 1937 .
it had a revolutionary design that broke away from the usual children 's comics that were published broadsheet in size and not very colourful .
thomson capitalized on its success with a similar product " the beano " in 1938 .
on some occasions , new gag cartoons have been made for book publication .
these were published along with humorous automotive essays by h . allen smith , roger price and jean shepherd .
the design of the cartoon was juxtaposed by the cartoon 's creator .
because of the similar stylistic similarities between comic strips and early animated movies , " cartoon " came to refer to animation , and the word " cartoon " is currently used in reference to both cartoon cartoons and gag cartoons .
while " animation " designates any style of illustrated images seen in rapid succession to give the impression of movement , the word " cartoon " is most often used as a descriptor for television programs aimed at children , possibly featuring anthropomorphized animals , superheroes , the adventures of child protagonists or related themes .
in the 1980s , cartoon was shortened to " toon " .
this term was made popular in 1988 by the combined live-action / animated movie " who framed roger rabbit " .
