the specific meaning has evolved over time , but the modern usage usually refers to either : an image or series of images intended for satire , caricature , or humor ; or a motion picture that relies on a sequence of illustrations for its animation .
someone who makes cartoons in the first sense is called a " cartoonist " .
in the 19th century , cartoon came to refer-ironically at first-to humorous illustrations in magazines and newspapers .
in the early 20th century , it began to refer to animated movies which resembled print cartoons .
such cartoons often have pinpricks along the outlines of the design so that a bag of soottively or " pounced " over a cartoon , held against the wall , would leave black dots on the plaster plaster plasterers .
cartoons by painters , such as the raphael cartoons in london , and examples by leonardo da vinci , are highly prized in their own right .
this was when " punch " magazine applied the term to satirical drawings in its pages , especially sketches by john leech .
the original title for these drawings was " mr punch 's face is the letter q " and the new title " cartoon " was meant to be ironic , a reference to the self-aggrandizing posturing of westminster politicians .
most of the stories are a single drawing with a kindet caption beneath , or — less often — a speech balloon .
newspaper syndicates have also distributed single-panel cartoons by mel calman , bill holman , gary larson , george lichty , fred neher and others .
many consider " new yorker " cartoonist peter arno the father of the modern gagisi cartoonist cartoon strips as did arno himself reeling .
richard thompson illustrated many feature articles in " the washington post " before creating his " cul de sac " comic strip .
in the united states , cartoons are not commonly called " cartoons " themselves , but rather " comics " or " funnies " .
nonetheless , the creators of comic strips — as well as comic books and graphic novels — are usually referred to as " cartoonists " .
some famous cartoonists of humorous comic strips are scott adams , steve bell , charles schulz , e . c . segar , mort walker and bill watterson .
the pictorial satire of william hogarth is regarded as a precursor to the development of political cartoons in 18th century england .
george townshend produced some of the first overtly political cartoons and caricatures in the 1750s .
gillray explored the use of the medium for lampooning and caricature .
by calling the king , prime ministers and generals to account for their behaviour , many of gillray 's satires were directed against george iii .
george cruikshank became the leading cartoonist in the period after gillray , from 1815 until the 1840s .
by the mid-1800s , major political newspapers in many other countries had cartoons commenting on the politics of the day .
thomas nast , in new york city , showed how realistic german drawing techniques could redefine american cartooning .
tweed was arrested in spain when police identified him from nast 's cartoons .
in france under the july monarchy , honore daumier took up the new genre of political and social caricature .
lawsuits have been very rare ; the first successful lawsuit against a cartoonist in over a century in britain came in 1921 , when j . h . thomas , the leader of the national union of railwaymentify nurnberger , initiated libel proceedings against the magazine of the british communist party .
thomas claimed defamation in the form of cartoons and words depicting the events of " black friday " , when he allegedly betrayed the miners ' federation .
to thomas , the framing of his image threatened to grievously degrade his character in the popular imagination .
in the u . s . , one well-known cartoonist for these fields is sidney harris .
books with cartoons are usually magazine-format comic books , or sometimes reprints of newspaper cartoons .
the story line in magazines , comic books and cinema that most liked boys was the heroism of british soldiers fighting wars that were exciting and just .
thomson issued the first dandy comic in december 1937 .
it had a revolutionary design that broke away from the usual children 's comics that were published broadsheet in size and not very colourful .
thomson capitalized on its success with a similar product " the beano " in 1938 .
on some occasions , new gag cartoons have been made for book publication .
the design of the cartoon was juxtaposed by the cartoon 's creator .
because of the similar stylistic similarities between comic strips and early animated movies , " cartoon " came to refer to animation , and the word " cartoon " is currently used in reference to both cartoon cartoons and gag cartoons .
while " animation " designates any style of illustrated images seen in rapid succession to give the impression of movement , the word " cartoon " is most often used as a descriptor for television programs aimed at children , possibly featuring anthropomorphized animals , superheroes , the adventures of child protagonists or related themes .
this term was made popular in 1988 by the combined live-action / animated movie " who framed roger rabbit " .