Nucleophile is a chemical species that donates an electron pair to form a chemical bond in relation to a reaction.
All molecules or ions with a free pair of electrons or at least one pi bond can act as nucleophiles.
Nucleophilicity, sometimes referred to as nucleophile strength, refers to a substance's nucleophilic character and is often used to compare the affinity of atoms.
Nucleophiles may take part in nucleophilic substitution, whereby a nucleophile becomes attracted to a full or partial positive charge.
The terms "nucleophile" and "electrophile" were introduced by Christopher Kelk Ingold in 1933, replacing the terms "anionoid" and "cationoid" proposed earlier by A. J. Lapworth in 1925.
The word nucleophile is derived from nucleus and the Greek word φιλος, philos for love.
In general, in a row across the periodic table, the more basic the ion (the higher the pK of the conjugate acid) the more reactive it is as a nucleophile.
Sulfur is in general a better nucleophile than oxygen.
The following empirical data have been obtained by measuring reaction rates for a large number of reactions involving a large number of nucleophiles and electrophiles.
Nucleophiles displaying the so-called alpha effect are usually omitted in this type of treatment.
This free-energy relationship relates the pseudo first order reaction rate constant (in water at 25 °C), "k", of a reaction, normalized to the reaction rate, "k", of a standard reaction with water as the nucleophile, to a nucleophilic constant "n" for a given nucleophile and a substrate constant "s" that depends on the sensitivity of a substrate to nucleophilic attack (defined as 1 for methyl bromide).
The equation predicts that, in a nucleophilic displacement on benzyl chloride, the azide anion reacts 3000 times faster than water.
The equation states that two nucleophiles react with the same relative reactivity regardless of the nature of the electrophile, which is in violation of the reactivity–selectivity principle.
For this reason, this equation is also called the "constant selectivity relationship".
or (not displayed) ions based on Malachite green.
The values for the relative cation reactivities are −0.4 for the malachite green cation, +2.6 for the benzenediazonium cation, and +4.5 for the tropylium cation.
The second order reaction rate constant "k" at 20 °C for a reaction is related to a nucleophilicity parameter "N", an electrophilicity parameter "E", and a nucleophile-dependent slope parameter "s".
In short, nucleophilicities towards sp or sp centers follow the same pattern.
Examples of nucleophiles are anions such as Cl, or a compound with a lone pair of electrons such as NH (ammonia).
In the example below, the oxygen of the hydroxide ion donates an electron pair to form a new chemical bond with the carbon at the end of the bromopropane molecule.
Because of this backside attack, S2 reactions result in a reversal of the configuration of the electrophile.
An ambident nucleophile is one that can attack from two or more places, resulting in two or more products.
For example, the thiocyanate ion (SCN) may attack from either the S or the N .
For this reason, the S2 reaction of an alkyl halide with SCN often leads to a mixture of an alkyl thiocyanate (R-SCN) and an alkyl isothiocyanate (R-NCS).
Similar considerations apply in the Kolbe nitrile synthesis.
While the halogens aren't nucleophilic in their diatomic form (e.g.
I is not a nucleophile), their anions are good nucleophiles.
In polar, protic solvents, F is the weakest nucleophile, and I the strongest; this order is reversed in polar, aprotic solvents.
These reagents are often used to perform nucleophilic additions.
Enols are ambident nucleophiles, but, in general, nucleophilic at the alpha carbon atom.
In general, "sulfur is very nucleophilic because of its large size", which makes it readily polarizable, and its lone pairs of electrons are readily accessible.