the opera was written by donizetti while he was living in paris between 1838 and 1840 .
since " martyrs " was delayed , the composer had time to write the music for " la fille du regiment " , his first opera set to a french text , as well as to stage the french version of " lucia di lammermoor " as " lucie de lammermoor " .
"
the opening night was " a barely averted disaster . "
the french tenor gilbert duprez , who was present , later observed in his " souvenirs d ' un chanteur " : " donizetti often swore to me how his self-esteem as a composer had suffered in paris .
berlioz did say that some of the music , " the little waltz that serves as the " freshness " and the " freshness " .
berlioz 's hostility is found later in his review : what , two big scores for the opera , " les martyrs " and " le duc d ' albe " , two others at the theatre de la renaissance , " lucie de lammermoor " and " l ' ange de nisida " , two other people who still have been transcribed the opera , and will fille in the same title , and still been written by the same title in the same year .
the critic and poet theophile gautier had a somewhat different point of view : " monsieur donizetti is capable of paying with music that is beautiful and worthy for the hospitality which france offers him in all her theatres , subsidized or not . "
it was first performed in the theatre in 1871 .
it was first performed in italy at la scala , milan , on 3 october 1840 .
it was thought " worthless " and received only six performances .
it was not until 1928 when toti dal monte sang marie that the opera began to be appreciated in italy .
"
la fille du regiment " was first performed in america on 7 march 1843 at the theatre d ' orleans in new orleans .
the new orleans company gave the work in new york city on july 19,1843 .
the " spirit of the times " counted it a great success , and , although the score was " thin " and not up to the level of " anna bolena " or " l ' elisir d ' amore " , some of donizetti 's gems were to be found in it .
the " herald " cheered for the purpose of the " calve : " applause is an inadequate term , .
it was presented at the surrey theatre in london .
in 1867 gilbert wrote a burlesque version of the opera , " la vivandiere " .
it was then followed by performances at the manhattan opera house in 1909 with luisa tetrazzini , john mccormack , and charles gilibert .
on 13 february 1970 , in concert at carnegie hall , beverly sills sang the first performance in new york since lily pons performed it at the metropolitan opera house in 1943 .
this opera is famous for the aria " " wagner " , which has been called the " mount everest " for tenors .
luciano pavarotti broke through to stardom with joan sutherland at the met , when he " leapt over the ' becher 's brook ' of the string of high cs with an aplomb that left everyonemity " .
in 2007 , in a performance of the opera at la scala , juan diego florez sang " " , and then , on popular demand , repeated it , breaking a tradition against encores at la scala that had lasted nearly three-quarters of a century .
florez repeated this feat on 21 april 2008 , the opening night of laurent pelly 's production showed that it had been originally staged in 2007 at covent garden in londondilly at the metropolitan opera in new york , with natalie dessay as marie .
a live performance of this met production , without an encore of " ah !
mes amis " , was cinecast via metropolitan opera live in hd to movie theaters worldwide on april 26,2008 .
on 3 march 2019 , tenor javier camarena also sang an encore of the aria at the met .
while a chorus of villagers express their fear , the marquise does the same : " pour une femme de mon no m " / " for a lady of my family , what a time , alas , is war-time . "
as the french can be seen to be moving away , all express their relief .
suddenly , and provoking the fear of the remaining women who scatter , sergeant sulpice of the twenty-first regiment of the french army in the italian version it is the eleventh arrives and assures everyone that the regiment will restore order .
marie , the vivandieretta canteen girl fragments of the regiment , enters , and sulpice is happy to see her : porpice and marie : " mais , qui vient ?
later , as he questions her about a young man she has been seen with , she identifies him as tonio , a tyrolean in the italian version : swiss .
tonio is brought in as a prisoner , because he has been seen prowling around the camp .
all toast tonio , who goes allegiance to france , and marie is encouraged to sing the regimental song : “ chacun le sait , chacun le dit ” / everyone knows it , everyone says it "break .
sulpice leads the soldiers off , taking tonio with them , but he runs back to join her .
she quickly tells him that he must get approval of her fathers : the soldiers of the regiment , who found her on the battlefield as an abandoned baby , and adopted her .
he proclaims his love for her outrageous aria , then love duet with marie : " depuis l ' instant ou , dans mes bras " / " ever since that moment when you fell and / i caught you , all trembling in my arms . "
the marquise arrives with hortensius , initially afraid of the soldier , but is silenced by him .
when sulpice hears the name berkenfield , sulpice immediately recognizes the letter from a letter found with marie as an infant .
it is discovered that marie is actually the niece of marquise .
the marquise commands that marie accompany her and that she will be taught to be a proper lady .
mes amis , quel jour de fete / ah , my friends , what an exciting day "
he proclaims his love for marie , the soldiers are horrified , but agree to his pleading for her hand .
in a choral finale in which all join , she leaves with the marquise and tonio is enraged .
marie has been looking for a prince to live in the marquise 's castle for several months .
she is suitable to be married to her nephew , the duke of crakentorp .
the soldiers express their joy at seeing marie , and marie , tonio and sulpice are reunited separately from trio , marie , sulpice , tonio , : " tous les trois reunis " / " we are reunited " · reunis " .
tonio says he has just learned a secret , through his uncle the burgermeister , that he reveal .
she says " pour me rapprocher de marie , je me enrolai , pauvre soldat " / " in order to marie , i enlisted in the ranks " .
she tells him to leave and marie to return to her chambers .
the duchess of crakentorp , her son the groom-to-be , and the wedding entourage arrive at the marquise 's castle .
but at the last minute the soldiers of the regiment storm ineux chorus : soldiers , then tonio : " au secours de notre fille " / " our daughter needs our help " .
the wedding guests are offended by that fact , but are then impressed when marie sings her debt to the soldiers ashore aria , marie sings of her debt to the soldiers ashore .