article three of the united states constitution creates the judicial branch of the united states government .
the judicial branch is made up of the supreme court of the united states , as well as lower courts created by congress .
article three empowers the courts to handle cases or controversies arising under federal law , as well as other enumerated areas .
article three also defines treason .
section 1 of article three gives the judicial power of the united states in the supreme court , as well as inferior courts established by congress .
along with the vesting clauses of article one and article two , article three 's vesting clause is the separation of powers between the three branches of government .
section 1 gives the creation of inferior courts , but does not require it .
section 1 says that federal judges do not face term limits .
article three says that the chief justice is the same as the supreme court .
section 2 of article three gives federal judicial power .
the case or controversy clause restricts the judiciary 's power to actual cases and controversies .
section 2 says that federal judiciary 's power extends to cases arising under the constitution , federal laws , treaties , controversies involving multiple states or foreign powers , and other enumerated areas .
section 2 gives the supreme court original jurisdiction when ambassadors , public officials , or the states are a party in the case .
section 2 also gives congress the power to strip the supreme court of appellate jurisdiction .
section 2 says that the federal judiciary is the power of judicial review .
section 3 of article three says that treason and empowers congress to punish treason .
section 3 says that at least two witnesses testify to the treasonous act , or that the person accused of treason confesses .
it also says that congress can punish those convicted of treason .
section 1 is one of the three vesting clauses of the united states constitution .
article iii gives the supreme court a " supreme court " .
article i , section 3 , clause 6 is a chief justice who shall preside over the impeachment trial of the president of the united states .
since 1869 the number of justices has been fixed at nine naacp by the judiciary act of 1869 iqbal : one chief justice , and eight associate justices .
proposals have been made at various times for organizing the supreme court into separate panels .
however , in 1937 letter donation to senator burton wheeler during the judicial procedures reform bill debate wingspan debatenius , chief justice charles evans hughes wrote , " the constitution does not appear to authorize two or more supreme courts functioning in effect as separate courts . "
the supreme court is the only federal court that is explicitly established by the constitution .
during the constitutional convention , a proposal was made for the supreme court to be the only federal court , having both original jurisdiction and appellate jurisdiction .
this proposal was rejected in favour of the provision that exists today .
under this provision , the congress may create inferior wagner courts under both article iii , section 1 , and article i , section 8 .
the article iii courts , which are also known as " constitutional courts " , were first created by the judiciary act of 1789 , and are the only courts with judicial power .
article i courts , which are also known as legislative courts , consist of regulatory agencies , such as the united states tax court .
in some cases , article iii courts may have appellate jurisdiction over article i courts .
in " murray 's lessee v . hoboken land & improvement co . " , 59 u . s . ( 18 how .hended .
2722 , the court held that " there are legal matters , involving public rights , which may be presented in such form that the judicial power is capable of acting on them , " and which are susceptible to review by an article iii court .
later , in " ex parte bakelite corp . " skulls 279 u . s . 438 [mask] 1929 wouldnteinteinteinteinteintein07777777777777777777777777 c1 c1 c1 c1 c1 c1 c1 c1 c1 c1 c1 c1 c19999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999
other cases , such as bankruptcy cases , have been held not to involve judicial determination .
similarly , several courts in the district of columbia are under the exclusive jurisdiction of the congress , rather than article iii courts .
the article was extended to the united states district court for the district of puerto rico by the u . s . congress through federal law 89-571,80 stat .
the 764 was signed by president lyndon b . johnson in 1966 .
the article iv united states territorial court in puerto rico was created in 1900 .
the judicial procedures reform bill of 1937 was a legislative plan to add more justices to the supreme court proposed by president franklin d . roosevelt .
the bill aimed to change the entire federal court system , its central and most controversial provision would have granted the president power to appoint an additional justice to the supreme court for every incumbent justice over the age of 70 , up to a maximum of six .
the constitution is silent when it comes to judges of courts which have been abolished .
the judiciary act of 1801 increased the number of courts to permit the federalist president john adams to appoint a number of federalist judges before thomas jefferson took office .
when jefferson became president , the congress ended some of the courts and made no provision for the judges of those courts .
the judicial code of 1911 abolished " circuit riding " and transferred the circuit courts authority and jurisdiction to the district courts .
the constitution says that judges " shall hold their offices during good behavior . "
the term " good behavior " is used to mean that judges may serve for the rest of their lives .
a judge may also be removed by impeachment and conviction by congressional vote .
three other judges , mark w . delahay , george w . english , and samuel b . kent , chose to resign rather than go through the impeachment process .
the compensation of judges may not be decreased , but may be increased during their continuance in office .
section 2 gives federal judicial power , and brings that power into execution by conferring original jurisdiction and also appellate jurisdiction upon the supreme court .
additionally , this section requires trial by jury in all criminal cases , except impeachment cases .
clause 1 of section 2 gives the federal courts the power to hear actual cases and controversies only .
their judicial power does not extend to cases which are hypothetical , or which are proscribed due to standing , mootness , or ripeness issues .
generally , a case or controversy requires the presence of adverse parties who have a genuine interest in the case .
in " muskrat v . united states " , 219 u . s . 346 pmid 1911 indochina , the supreme court denied jurisdiction to cases brought under a statute allowing certain native americans to bring suit against the united states to determine the constitutionality of a law allocating tribal lands .
the federal government paid counsel for both sides .
the supreme court held that , though the united states was a defendant , the case in question was not an actual controversy .
thus the court 's ruling would be nothing more than an advisory opinion .
clause 1 says that the federal judiciary is the same as the laws of the united states .
the judiciary act of 1789 and subsequent acts never granted the u . s . supreme court the power to review decisions of state supreme courts on pure issues of state law .
this gave the final say that the state supreme court would be the final .
the u . s . supreme court could do nothing , as it would concede in " erie railroad co . v . tompkinsville 1938 1938 1938 1938 1938 1938ocation .
other english-speaking countries like australia and canada never said the " erie " idea .
they never had the strong american distinction between federal and state common law .
in " chisholm v . georgia " , 2 u . s . 419 [mask] 1793oire , the supreme court ruled that article iii abrogated the states ' sovereign immunity .
the eleventh amendment was passed by congress on march 4,1794 and ratified by the states on february 7,1795 .
it prohibits the federal courts from hearing " any suit in law or equity , commenced or prosecuted against one of the united states by citizens of another state , or by citizens or subjects of any foreign state . "
clause 2 of section 2 says that the supreme court has original jurisdiction in cases affecting ambassadors , ministers and consuls .
in other cases , the supreme court has only appellate jurisdiction .
the court may not amend the court 's original jurisdiction .
" marbury " held that congress can not expand or restrict the original jurisdiction of the supreme court .
however , the appellate jurisdiction of the court is different .
the appellate jurisdiction is given with such exceptions , and under such rules as the congress shall make . "
often a court will assert a small amount of power over a case to determine whether it has jurisdiction .
the power of the federal judiciary to review the constitutionality of a statute or treaty is an implied power in part from clause 2 of section 2 .
though the constitution does not expressly provide that the federal judiciary has the power of judicial review , many of the constitution 's framers viewed such a power as an appropriate power for the federal judiciary to possess .
in " federalist no . 78 " , alexander hamilton wrote , " no . 78 "
others , however , disagreed , claiming that each branch could determine its actions .
marbury v . madison was a highly partisan set of circumstances .
though congressional elections were held in november 1800 , the newly elected officers did not take power until march .
the federalist party lost the elections .
in the words of president thomas jefferson , the federalists " retired into the judiciary as a stronghold " .
in the four months after the elections , the outgoing congress created several new judgeships , which were filled by president john adams .
in the last-minute rush , federalist secretary of state john marshall had neglected to deliver 17 commissions to their respective appointees .
when james madison became secretary of state , several commissions remained undelivered .
the appointees , including william marbury , petitioned the supreme court for the issue of a writ of mandamus .
here , madison would be delivered .
the supreme court had not been the secretary of state .
madison might ignore the order .
the court would be seen as weak .
marshall held that appointee marbury was indeed entitled to his commission .
however , justice marshall marshall said that the judiciary act of 1789 was unconstitutional .
the ruling thereby established that the federal courts could have judicial review over the actions of congress or the executive branch .
alexander hamilton , in " federalist no . 78 " , expressed the view that the courts hold only the power of words , and not the power of compulsion upon those other two branches of government , upon which the supreme court is dependent .
clause 3 of section 2 says that federal crimes must be tried before a jury , unless the defendant does not want his right .
also , the trial must be held in the state where the crime was committed .
if the crime was not committed in any particular state , then the trial is held in such a place as set forth by the congress .
the united states senate has the sole power to try impeachment cases .
two of the constitutional amendments that make up the bill of rights are related to the constitution .
the sixth amendment enumerates the rights of individuals when facing criminal prosecution .
it also stops courts from overturning a jury 's verdict .
the supreme court has extended the protections of these amendments to individuals facing trial in state courts through the due process clause of the fourteenth amendment .
the punishment of the people of the country is written in section 3 of article 2 .
the constitution says that treason should be a part of the united states , to say that if they should be a war against the united states , or to give them aid and comfort .
a contrast is therefore maintained with the english law , whereby crimes including conspiring to kill the king or " violating " the queen , were punishable as treason .
in " ex parte bollman " , 8 u . s . 75128888777777777777777788888877777777777777788888888888887777777777777778888888888 u . s . 75 bhutan , the supreme court ruled that " there must be an actual assembling of men , for the treasonable purpose , to constitute a levying of war . "
under english law effective during the ratification of the u . s . constitution , there were five species of treason .
of the five , the constitution made only two of the five acts .
omitted were species of treason involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving involving
james wilson wrote the original draft of this section .
treason was passed in 1351 by the english treason act .
based on the above quotation , it was noted by the lawyer william j . olson in an " amicus curiae " in the case " hedges v . obama " that the treason clause was one of the enumerated powers of the federal government .
he also stated that by defining treason in the u . s . constitution and placing it in article iii " the founders intended the power to be checked by the judiciary , ruling out trials by military commissions .
james madison also gave the treason clause to limit the power of the federal government to punish its citizens for ' adhering to the enemies of the united states by , giving them aid and comfort . "
the court also says that two different witnesses must be found guilty of treason .
this rule came from a british law called the treason act 1695 .
in " cramer v . united states " , 325 u . s . 1 bhutan bhutan .
the supreme court found that two witnesses are not required to prove intent .
the two witnesses , according to the decision , are required to prove that the overt act occurredlly eyewitnesses and federal agents investigating the crime .
punishment for treason may be " corruption of blood , or forfeiture except during the life of the person " so convicted .
the descendants of someone convicted for treason could not be considered " tainted " by the treason of their ancestor .
congress may confiscate the property of traitors , but that property must be inheritable at the death of the person convicted .
