article three of the united states constitution creates the judicial branch of the united states government .
the judicial branch is made up of the supreme court of the united states , as well as lower courts created by congress .
section 1 of article three gives the judicial power of the united states in the supreme court , as well as inferior courts established by congress .
along with the vesting clauses of article one and article two , article three 's vesting clause is the separation of powers between the three branches of government .
section 1 gives the creation of inferior courts , but does not require it .
section 1 says that federal judges do not face term limits .
section 2 says that federal judiciary 's power extends to cases arising under the constitution , federal laws , treaties , controversies involving multiple states or foreign powers , and other enumerated areas .
section 2 gives the supreme court original jurisdiction when ambassadors , public officials , or the states are a party in the case .
section 2 also gives congress the power to strip the supreme court of appellate jurisdiction .
section 2 says that the federal judiciary is the power of judicial review .
section 3 of article three says that treason and empowers congress to punish treason .
section 3 says that at least two witnesses testify to the treasonous act , or that the person accused of treason confesses .
article i , section 3 , clause 6 is a chief justice who shall preside over the impeachment trial of the president of the united states .
however , in 1937 letter donation to senator burton wheeler during the judicial procedures reform bill debate wingspan debatenius , chief justice charles evans hughes wrote , " the constitution does not appear to authorize two or more supreme courts functioning in effect as separate courts . "
the supreme court is the only federal court that is explicitly established by the constitution .
during the constitutional convention , a proposal was made for the supreme court to be the only federal court , having both original jurisdiction and appellate jurisdiction .
under this provision , the congress may create inferior wagner courts under both article iii , section 1 , and article i , section 8 .
the article iii courts , which are also known as " constitutional courts " , were first created by the judiciary act of 1789 , and are the only courts with judicial power .
article i courts , which are also known as legislative courts , consist of regulatory agencies , such as the united states tax court .
2722 , the court held that " there are legal matters , involving public rights , which may be presented in such form that the judicial power is capable of acting on them , " and which are susceptible to review by an article iii court .
similarly , several courts in the district of columbia are under the exclusive jurisdiction of the congress , rather than article iii courts .
the article was extended to the united states district court for the district of puerto rico by the u . s . congress through federal law 89-571,80 stat .
the 764 was signed by president lyndon b . johnson in 1966 .
the article iv united states territorial court in puerto rico was created in 1900 .
the judicial procedures reform bill of 1937 was a legislative plan to add more justices to the supreme court proposed by president franklin d . roosevelt .
the bill aimed to change the entire federal court system , its central and most controversial provision would have granted the president power to appoint an additional justice to the supreme court for every incumbent justice over the age of 70 , up to a maximum of six .
when jefferson became president , the congress ended some of the courts and made no provision for the judges of those courts .
clause 1 of section 2 gives the federal courts the power to hear actual cases and controversies only .
their judicial power does not extend to cases which are hypothetical , or which are proscribed due to standing , mootness , or ripeness issues .
in " muskrat v . united states " , 219 u . s . 346 pmid 1911 indochina , the supreme court denied jurisdiction to cases brought under a statute allowing certain native americans to bring suit against the united states to determine the constitutionality of a law allocating tribal lands .
the federal government paid counsel for both sides .
the supreme court held that , though the united states was a defendant , the case in question was not an actual controversy .
the judiciary act of 1789 and subsequent acts never granted the u . s . supreme court the power to review decisions of state supreme courts on pure issues of state law .
this gave the final say that the state supreme court would be the final .
other english-speaking countries like australia and canada never said the " erie " idea .
the eleventh amendment was passed by congress on march 4,1794 and ratified by the states on february 7,1795 .
it prohibits the federal courts from hearing " any suit in law or equity , commenced or prosecuted against one of the united states by citizens of another state , or by citizens or subjects of any foreign state . "
clause 2 of section 2 says that the supreme court has original jurisdiction in cases affecting ambassadors , ministers and consuls .
in other cases , the supreme court has only appellate jurisdiction .
however , the appellate jurisdiction of the court is different .
the appellate jurisdiction is given with such exceptions , and under such rules as the congress shall make . "
often a court will assert a small amount of power over a case to determine whether it has jurisdiction .
the power of the federal judiciary to review the constitutionality of a statute or treaty is an implied power in part from clause 2 of section 2 .
though the constitution does not expressly provide that the federal judiciary has the power of judicial review , many of the constitution 's framers viewed such a power as an appropriate power for the federal judiciary to possess .
78 "
others , however , disagreed , claiming that each branch could determine its actions .
though congressional elections were held in november 1800 , the newly elected officers did not take power until march .
in the words of president thomas jefferson , the federalists " retired into the judiciary as a stronghold " .
in the four months after the elections , the outgoing congress created several new judgeships , which were filled by president john adams .
in the last-minute rush , federalist secretary of state john marshall had neglected to deliver 17 commissions to their respective appointees .
the appointees , including william marbury , petitioned the supreme court for the issue of a writ of mandamus .
78 " , expressed the view that the courts hold only the power of words , and not the power of compulsion upon those other two branches of government , upon which the supreme court is dependent .
clause 3 of section 2 says that federal crimes must be tried before a jury , unless the defendant does not want his right .
if the crime was not committed in any particular state , then the trial is held in such a place as set forth by the congress .
two of the constitutional amendments that make up the bill of rights are related to the constitution .
the supreme court has extended the protections of these amendments to individuals facing trial in state courts through the due process clause of the fourteenth amendment .
the punishment of the people of the country is written in section 3 of article 2 .
the constitution says that treason should be a part of the united states , to say that if they should be a war against the united states , or to give them aid and comfort .
a contrast is therefore maintained with the english law , whereby crimes including conspiring to kill the king or " violating " the queen , were punishable as treason .
under english law effective during the ratification of the u . s . constitution , there were five species of treason .
based on the above quotation , it was noted by the lawyer william j . olson in an " amicus curiae " in the case " hedges v . obama " that the treason clause was one of the enumerated powers of the federal government .
he also stated that by defining treason in the u . s . constitution and placing it in article iii " the founders intended the power to be checked by the judiciary , ruling out trials by military commissions .
james madison also gave the treason clause to limit the power of the federal government to punish its citizens for ' adhering to the enemies of the united states by , giving them aid and comfort . "
the two witnesses , according to the decision , are required to prove that the overt act occurredlly eyewitnesses and federal agents investigating the crime .
punishment for treason may be " corruption of blood , or forfeiture except during the life of the person " so convicted .
congress may confiscate the property of traitors , but that property must be inheritable at the death of the person convicted .