a church building is a building where people worship their religion .
the term is often used by christians to refer to the physical buildings where they worship .
in traditional christian architecture , a church interior is often structured in the shape of a christian cross .
when viewed from plan view the vertical beam of the cross is represented by the center aisle and seating while the horizontal beam and junction of the cross is formed by the bema and altar .
towers or domes are often added with the intention of directing the eye of the viewer towards the heavens .
many buildings that were designed for other purposes have now been converted for church use .
the oldest christian church building was a house church founded between 233 and 256 .
from the 11th to the 14th centuries , a wave of building of cathedrals and smaller parish churches were built across western europe .
a cathedral is a building in the eastern orthodox , or oriental orthodox churches .
in greek , the adjective " kyriak-os /-e /-on " means " belonging , or pertaining , to a " kyrios " " " lord " ono ono ono ono onoph .
in the greek language , the older word " ecclesia " , " ekklesia " , literally " assembly " , " congregation " , or the place where such a gathering occurs occurs occurs occurs .
this usage was also retained in latin and the languages derived from latin , eglise , italian " iglesia " , spanish " iglesia " , portuguese " igreja " etc .
in the germanic and some slavic languages , the word " kyriak-os /-e /-on " was adopted instead and derivatives formed thereof .
in old english the sequence of derivation started as " cirice " , then middle english " churche " , and eventually " church " in its current pronunciation .
german " kirche " , scots " kirk " , russianttered " tserkov " ɔ , etc . , are all similarly derived .
the earliest christians did not build church buildings .
instead , they gathered in homesports : 5,20 : 20,1 corinthians 16 : 19 ɔs or in jewish worship places like the second temple or synagogues vols 2 : 46,19 : 8 tons .
the earliest archeologically identified christian church is a house church churchpalais " domus ecclesiae "arth , the dura-europos church , founded between 233 and 256 .
in the second half of the 3rd century ad , the first purpose-built halls for christian worship underwent construction began to be constructed .
many of these were destroyed early in the next century .
from the 11th to the 14th centuries , a wave of cathedral-building and building of smaller parish churches happened across western europe .
besides serving as a place of worship , the cathedral or parish church was frequently used as a general gathering-place by the communities in which they were located .
church grounds and buildings were also used for the storage of grain .
between 1000 and 1200 , the romanesque style became popular across europe .
the term " romanesque " refers to the tradition of roman architecture .
the romanesque style is defined by large and bulky edifices that are typically made of simple , compact , sparsely decorated geometric structures .
frequent features of the romanesque church include circular arches , round or octagonal towers and cushion capitals on pillars .
later in the same era , groined vault became popular .
the interiors of the museum and the inside of the building were widened and the motifs of sculptures took on more epic traits and themes .
the gothic style emerged around 1140 in ile-de-france and spread throughout europe .
gothic churches lost the compact qualities of the romanesque era .
all had geometric properties that reduced the need for large , rigid walls to ensure structural stability .
this also allowed the size of windows to increase , producing brighter and lighter interiors .
nave ceilings became higher and pillars and steeples grew taller .
many architects used these developments to push the limits of structural possibility .
in germany , the netherlands and spain , it became popular to build hall churches .
gothic cathedrals were lavishly designed , as in the romanesque era , and many share romanesque traits .
however , several also show very many detail and complexity in decoration .
the notre-dame de paris and notre-dame de reims in france , as well as the san francesco d ’ assisi in palermo , and the salisbury cathedral and wool church in england show the details of gothic cathedrals .
some of the most well-known gothic churches remained unfinished for centuries , after the gothic style fell out of popularity .
the building of the cologne cathedral was begun in 1248 .
in the 15th and 16th century , the change in ethics and society due to the renaissance and the reformation also influenced the building of churches .
the style was much like the gothic style , but in a simplified way .
the basilica was not the most popular type of church anymore , but instead hall churches were built .
the typical feature is columns and classical capitals .
in protestant churches , the proclamation of god 's word is of special importance , the visitor 's line of view is directed towards the pulpit .
the baroque style was first used in italy around 1575 .
from there it spread to the rest of europe and to the european colonies .
during the baroque years , the building industry grew heavily .
buildings , even churches , were used as indicators for wealth , authority and influence .
domes and capitals were decorated with moulding .
for the first time churches were seen as one connected work of art and consistent artistic ideas were developed .
instead of long buildings , more central-plan buildings were created .
the sprawling decoration with floral ornamentation and mythological motives raised until about 1720 to the rococo era .
the protestant churches preferred lateral churches .
a common architecture for churches is the shape of a cross .
these churches also often have a dome or other large vaulted space in the interior .
other common shapes for churches include a circle , to represent eternity , or an octagon or similar star shape , to represent the church 's bringing light to the world .
another common feature is the spire , a tall tower on the " west " end of the church or over the crossing .
another common feature of many christian churches is the eastwards orientation of the front altar .
often , the altar will not be oriented due east , but in the direction of sunrise .
it became prevalent in the west in the 8th to 9th century .
the old roman custom of having the altar at the west end and the entrance at the east was sometimes followed as late as the 11th century .
the latin word basilicactus derived from greek , " basilike stoa " , royal " stoa "dillyrs .
after the roman empire became officially christian , the term came by extension to refer to a large and important church that has been given special ceremonial rights by the pope .
thus the word retains two senses today , one architectural and the other ecclesiastical .
a cathedral is a church , usually catholic , anglican , oriental orthodox or eastern orthodox .
the word cathedral takes its name from " cathedra " , or bishop 's throne gown inrting .
the term is sometimes incorrectly used to refer to any church of great size .
a cathedral is a very big church .
it might be as small as christ church cathedral in oxford , england , sacred heart cathedral in raleigh , united states , or chur cathedral in switzerland .
the cathedral was the largest building in any region .
a pilgrimage church is a church where people go to the tomb of a saints .
a conventual churchɕ is the main church building in a christian monastery or abbey .
a collegiate church is a church where the daily office of worship is maintained by a college of canons .
the church often had many lands that were held by the church .
they provide spaces for congregational worship and for the choir offices of their clerical community .
old and disused church buildings can be seen as an interesting proposition for developers .
there is another trend to convert old buildings for worship .
unusual venues in the uk include an old tram power station , a former bus garage , an old cinema and bingo hall , a former territorial army drill hall , and a former synagogue .
a windmill has also been turned into a church at reigate heath .
church properties have been a part of the same way as church management and private real estate companies to use church properties .
while it has received criticism from some , the partnership offers congregations the opportunity to increase revenue while preserving the property .
