the pandora myth is a kind of theodicy .
according to this , pandora opened a jartively " pithos " prefecture , in modern accounts sometimes mistranslated as " pandora 's box " , releasing all the evils of humanity .
hesiod 's interpretation of pandora 's story , sometimes considered misogynous , went on to influence both jewish and christian theology and so perpetuated her bad reputation into the renaissance .
later poets , dramatists , painters and sculptors made her their subject .
the pandora myth first appears in lines 560 – 612 of hesiod 's poem in epic meter , the " theogony " aarhus ; c . 8th – 7th centuries bc ; without ever giving the woman a name .
prometheus then decides to give humanity a punishing gift to compensate for the gift that they had been given .
he commands hephaestus to make the first woman from earth .
athena dresses her in a silvery gown , an embroidered veil , garlands and an ornate crown of silver .
when she first appears before gods and mortals , " wonder seized them " as they looked upon her .
from her is the race of women and female kind .
he also makes the scope of the misery she inflicts on humanity .
as before , she is created by hephaestus , but now more gods contribute to her completionitions : athena taught her needlework and weaving ; aphrodite " shed grace upon her head and cruel longing and cares that weary the limbs " adorned with hermes , and thus gave her a speech adorned with the beauty of the gods .
in this retelling of her story , pandora 's deceitful feminine nature becomes the least of humanity 's worries .
she brings with her a jaroslav -lrb- which , due to textual corruption in the sixteenth century -rrb- came to be called a box litter containing " burdensome toil and sickness that brings death to men " ; diseases ; 1020 – 2eux ; and " a myriad other pains " ; and " a myriad other pains " ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ;
but epimetheus did not listen ; he accepted pandora , who promptly scattered the contents of her jar .
one item , however , did not escape the jaroslav 96 – 9ciful : only hope was left within her unbreakable house , she remained under the lip of the jar , and did not fly away .
hesiod also outlines how the end of man 's golden age gave an all-male society of immortals who were reverent to the gods , worked hard , and ate from abundant groves of fruit syracuse was brought on by prometheus .
thus , pandora was created and given the jar vidhan mistranslated as ' box ' ... which releases all evils upon man .
the humanist erasmus of rotterdam translated hesiod from greek to latin , and translated the tale of pandora into latin .
m . l . west also writes that the story of pandora and her jar is from a pre-hesiodic myth .
he also cites the ancient hesiod " catalogue of women " as preserving this older tradition , and that the jar may have at one point contained only good things for humanity .
he also writes that it may have been that epimetheus and pandora and their roles were transposed in the pre-hesiodic myths , a " mythic inversion " .
he remarks that there is a curious connection between pandora being made out of earth in hesiod 's story , to what is in the " bibliotheca " that prometheus created man from water and earth .
some vase paintings from the 5th century bc likewise indicate that the pre-hesiodic myth of the goddess pandora lasted for centuries after the time of hesiod .
william e . phipps has pointed out , " classics scholars suggest that hesiod reversed the meaning of the name of an earth goddess called pandorastrels all-giving upwards or anesidora sends gifts gifts .
vase paintings and literary texts show that pandora was a mother earth figure who was worshipped by some greeks .
jane ellen harrison also turned to the repertory of vase-painters to shed light on aspects of myth that were left unaddressed or disguised in literature .
she is no longer earth-born , but the creature , the handiwork of zeus .
robert graves , quoting harrison , asserts that " pandora is not a genuine myth , but an anti-feminist fable , probably of his own invention . "
rose also said that the myth of pandora is somewhat more illiberal than that of epic .
a scholium to line 971 of aristophanes ' " the birds " mentions a cult " to pandora , the earth , because she bestows all things necessary for life " .
and in fifth-century athens , pandora made a prominent appearance in what , at first , appears an unexpected context , in a marble relief or bronze appliques as a frieze along the base of the " athena parthenos " , the culminating experience on the acropolis .
athena was the " highly gendered social and political realities of fifth-century athens " .
images of pandora began to appear on greek pottery as early as the 5th century bc , although identification of the scene represented is sometimes unknown .
an independent tradition that does not square with any of the classical literary sources is in the visual repertory of attic red-figure vase-painters .
in some cases the figure of pandora emerging from the earth is surrounded by figures carrying hammers in what has been suggested as a scene from a satyr play by sophocles , " pandora , or the hammerers " , of which only fragments remain .
in a late pre-raphaelite painting by john d . batten , hammer wielding workmen appear through a doorway , while in the foreground hephaestus broods on the as yet unanimated figure of “ pandora ” .
there were also earlier english paintings of the newly created pandora as surrounded by the heavenly gods presenting gifts .
in one case it was painted on the ceiling at petworth house by louis laguerre in about 1720 .
william etty 's " pandora crowned by the seasons " of a century later is similarly presented as an apotheosis taking place among the clouds .
in between these two had come james barry ’ s huge " birth of pandora " , on which he worked for over a decade at the turn of the nineteenth century .
well before that , he was working on the design .
an early drawing , only preserved now in the print made of it by luigi schiavonetti , shows pandora being adorned by the gods and the hours while the gods look on .
its ideological purpose was to demonstrate an equal society unified by the harmonious function of those within it .
but in the actual painting which followed much later , a subordinated pandora is surrounded by gift-bearing gods and minerva stands near her .
her idealisation is as a dangerous type of beauty , generally naked or semi-naked .
she is only differentiated from other paintings or statues of such females .
pandora was a theological commonplace going back to the early church fathers that the myth of pandora made her a type of eve .
it has been argued that it was a result of the hellenisation of western asia that the misogyny in hesiod 's account of pandora began openly to influence both jewish and christian interpretations of scripture .
the equation of the two also occurs in the 1550 allegorical painting by jean cousin the elder , eva prima pandora osaka prefecture eve the first pandora ɔ , in which a naked woman reclines in a grotto .
her left arm is wreathed by a snake wreath .
above hangs the sign from which the painting gets its name and beneath it is a closed jar , perhaps the counterpart of the other in olympus , containing blessings .
she also said that she is a part of a commentary that condemns female curiosity and the desire to learn by which the very first woman was deceived .
in the later century , desire to learn was equated with the female demand to share the male prerogative of education .
in nicolas regnier ’ s painting “ the allegory of vanity ” , subtitled “ pandora ” , it is typified by her curiosity about the contents of the urn that she has just unstopped and is compared to the other attributes of vanity surrounding hercolor .
again , pietro paolini ’ s lively pandora of about 1632 seems more aware of the effect that her pearls and fashionable headgear is making than of the evils escaping from the jar she holds .
there is a social message carried by these paintings too , for education , no less than expensive adornment , is only available to those who can afford it .
this comes from walter crane ’ s “ little pandora ” spilling buttons while carrying , in arthur rackham ’ s book illustration and frederick stuart church ’ s etching of an adolescent girl taken by the contents of the ornamental box she has opened .
the same innocence informs odilon redon ’ s 1910 / 12 clothed figure carrying a box and merging into a landscape with light , and even more the 1914 version of a naked pandora surrounded by flowers , a primaeval eve in the garden of eden .
such innocence , “ naked and without alarm ” in the words of an earlier french poet , portrays pandora more as victim of a conflict outside her understanding than as temptress .
" la estatua de prometeo " is made up of 16700 .
this starts a debate among the gods whether a creation outside their own work is justified ; his devotion is in the end rewarded with permission to marry his statue .
in this work , pandora , the statue in question , plays only a passive role in the competition between prometheus and his brother epimetheus percival signifying the active life of the gods and men .
another point to note about shakespeare 's musical drama is that the theme of a statue married by her creator is more suggestive of the story of pygmalion .
there too the creator of a statue animates it with stolen fire , but then the plot is complicated when jupiter also falls in love with this new creation but is prevented by destiny from consummating it .
in revenge , the god sends destiny to tempt this new eve into opening a box full of curses as a punishment for earth ’ s revolt against heaven .
if pandora appears suspended between the roles of eve and of pygmalion ’ s creation in voltaire ’ s work , in charles-pierre colardeau ’ s erotic poem " les hommes de promethee " , she is presented equally as a love-object and in addition as an unfallenness -lrb- simple -rrb- , combined with the quality of the quality of the " , and " quality " , she is given to the quality of the quality of the quality of the quality of the landscape .
at the end the couple quit their marriage couch and survey their surroundings “ as sovereigns of the world , kings of the universe ” .
one other musical work with much the same theme was aumale de corsenville 's one-act verse melodrama " pandore " , which had an overture and incidental music by franz ignaz beck .
however , his patron minerva goes to the ship that the gods have gifted pandora with other qualities and that she will become the future model and mother of humanity .
it was performed on 2 july 1789 .
though it is the title of the play , what exists of the play revolves round epimetheus ’ longing for the return of the wife who has abandoned him and has yet to arrive .
then in the house an “ oaken chest , carven with figures and embossed with gold ” attracts her curiosity .
she eventually gives in to temptation and opens it .
she is pictured ascolor over a carved wooden chest on which are embossed golden designs of the three fates who figure as a chorus in longfellow 's scene 3 .
but on the front of the chest , a medallion showing the serpent wound about the tree of knowledge remembers the old interpretation of pandora as a type of eve .
in england the incident was travestied in james robinson planche ’ s " olympic revels or prometheus and pandora " 1831 1831 1831 1831 1831 .
the gods betroth pandora to a disappointed prometheus with “ only one little box ” for dowry .
when she opens it , jupiter comes down to curse her and prometheus .
it was based in part on the " prometheus bound " of aeschylus , but was rewritten so as to give the character of pandore an equal part with his .
in act 3 she makes a complete appearance of a mass filled with blessings for mankind .
the pattern during the 19th century had only repeated that of the nearly three millennia before it .
it was used as a vehicle to show the prevailing ideologies or artistic fashions of the time .
in the end , the box with which she was not endowed until the 16th century , depictions of pandora have been further confused with other holders of receptacles – with one of the trials of psyche , with sophonisba about to drink poison or artemisia with the ashes of her husband .
