for example , fiddles may be set up with a bridge with a flatter arch to reduce the range of bow-arm motion needed for techniques such as the double shuffle , a form of bariolage involving rapid alternation between pairs of adjacent strings .
the fiddle is part of many traditional folkesthesia .
fiddling is also open to improvisation and embellishment .
the first recorded reference to the bowed lira was in the 9th century by the persian geographer ibn khurradadhbihʔ .
the other , with sloping shoulders and held between the knees , was the viola da gambasion " viol " group .
during the renaissance the gambas were important and elegant instruments ; they eventually lost ground to the louder louder lanterns and originally less aristocraticminating " viola da braccio " family .
the etymology of " fiddle " is uncertain : the germanic " fiddle " may derive from the same early romance word as does " violin " , or it may be natively germanic .
the germanic ancestor of " fiddle " might even be the ancestor of the early romance form of " violin " .
like the violin , it tended to have four strings , but came in different shapes and sizes .
the viols are held between the legs and played vertically , and have fretted fingerboards .
a solo fiddler is a norm in some north american , scandinavian , scottish and irish music .
following the folk revivals of the second half of the 20th century , however , it has become common for less formal situations to find large groups of fiddlers playing together .
these contrasting traditions may be vestiges of historical performance settings : large concert halls where violins were played required more instruments , before electronic amplification , than did more intimate dance halls and houses that fiddlers played in .
historically , most fiddle music was dance music , while violin music had either grown out of dance music or was something else entirely .
in situations that required greater volume , a fiddlerquette as long as they kept the beat gundam could push their instrument harder than a violinist .
in the very late 20th century , a few artists have successfully attempted a reconstruction of the scottish tradition of violin and " big fiddle " , " or cello .
some of the recorded examples are : iain fraser , christine hanson , amelia kaminski , and christine hanson 's bonnie lasses , alasdair fraser and natalie haas ' fire and grace .
hungarian , slovenian , and romanian fiddle players are often accompanied by a three-stringed variant of the viola , known as the " kontra " .
fiddle playing is characterized by a huge variety of ethnic or folk music traditions , each of which has its own distinctive sound .
american fiddling is a category of folk music .
fiddling is still popular in canada , and the many homegrown styles of canadian fiddling are seen as an important part of the country 's cultural identity .
