snafu is a very popular acronym that is often used to mean the sarcastic expression situation normal : all fucked up .
it is a well-known example of military acronym slang .
it is sometimes spelled as " all fouled up " or " all fouled up " .
it means that the situation is bad , but that this is a normal state of affairs .
the acronym is believed to have originated in the united states marine corps during world war ii .
in modern usage , " snafu " is sometimes used as an interjection .
sometimes it can mean a bad situation , mistake , or cause of trouble .
it is most commonly used in modern vernacular to describe running into an error or problem that is large and unexpected .
for example , in 2005 , " the new york times " published an article titled " hospital staff cutback blamed for test result snafu " .
" snafu " was first recorded in 1941 in their magazine " american notes and queries " .
" time magazine " used the term in their june 16,1942 issue : " last week u . s . citizens knew that gasoline rationing and rubber requisitioning were snafu . "
most reference works , such as the " random house unabridged dictionary " , supply an origin date of 1940 – 1944 .
rick atkinson writes about the origin of " snafu " , " fubar " , and a bevy of other terms to cynical gis ridiculing the army 's penchant for acronyms .
the " snafu " is not accepted , but the " oxford english dictionary " gives its origin and first recorded use as u . s . military slang .
in a wider study of military slang , elkin said in 1946 that there are a few acceptable substitutes such as ' screw up ' or ' mess up ' , ' but these do not have the emphasis value of the obscene equivalent .
he considered the expression to be " a caricature of army direction .
the soldier resignedly accepts his own less responsible position and expresses his cynicism at the inefficiency of army authority . "
he also said that " the expression . . is coming into general civilian use . "
it can also be bowdlerized , just like " snafu " — to situation unchanged : still fouled up " or similar .
it is used in a military context .
