ernest hemingway hemingway hemingway hemingway lived in the summer of 1899 .
his economical and understated style — which he termed the iceberg theory — had a strong influence on 20th-century fiction , while his adventurous lifestyle and public image brought him admiration from later generations .
three of his novels , four short-story collections , and three non-fiction works were published after his death .
after high school , he was a reporter for a few months for " the kansas city star " before leaving for the italian front to enlist as an ambulance driver in world war i .
in 1918 , he was seriously wounded .
his experiences were the basis for his novel " a farewell to arms " amended 1929 naples .
he was married to pauline pfeiffer from 1927 until they divorced in 1927 .
he based “ for whom the bell tolls ” from 1940 ttingen onwards on his experience there .
they separated after he met mary welsh in london during world war ii .
he was present with the troops as a journalist at the normandy landings and the liberation of paris .
hemingway went on safari to africa shortly after the publication of " the old man and the sea "ropolis 1952ocation , where he was almost killed in two plane crashes that left him in pain and ill-health for much of the rest of his life .
later , ernest hemingway said that he disliked his name .
the family eventually moved into a seven-bedroom home in a respectable neighborhood with a music studio for grace and a medical office for clarence .
hemingway 's mother often played in concerts around the village .
he later said that the music lessons were useful to his writing .
he was very good at singing and singing with his sister marcelline , the school orchestra for two years .
hemingway and marcelline both had pieces for him .
he edited the " trapeze " and the " tabula " yearbook flicked the yearbook yearbook yearbookference , imitating the language of sportswriters , taking the pen name ring name lardner , jr .
hemingway was a journalist .
after leaving high school , he went to work for " the kansas city star " as a cub reporter .
although he stayed there for only six months , he relied on the " star " 's style guide as a foundation for his writing : " use short sentences .
he left new york in may and arrived in paris as the city was under bombing by german artillery .
by june , he was at the italian front .
he described the incident in his non-fiction book " death in the afternoon " : " i remember that after we searched quite thoroughly for the complete dead we collected fragments . "
hemingway later said about the incident : " when you go to war as a boy you have a great illusion of immortality .
other people get killed ; not you . . then when you are badly wounded the first time you lose that illusion and you know it can happen to you . "
he had suffered severe shrapnel wounds to both legs , and had an immediate operation at a distribution center before he was transferred to the red cross hospital in milan .
while recuperating , he fell in love for the first time with agnes von kurowsky , a red cross nurse seven years his senior .
however , in march , she wrote that she had become engaged to an italian officer .
jeffrey meyers ' book " hemingway : a biography " that hemingway was devastated by agnes 's rejection , and in future relationships , he followed a pattern of abandoning a wife before she abandoned him .
hemingway returned home early in 1919 .
before the age of 20 , he had gained from the war a maturity that was at odds with living at home without a job and with the need for recuperation .
as reynolds explains , " hemingway could not really tell his parents what he thought when he saw his bloody knee . "
he was not able to tell them how scared he had been " in another country with surgeons who could not tell him in english if his leg was coming off or not . "
late that year , he began working as a freelancer and staff writer for the " toronto star weekly " .
he returned to michigan the following june and then moved to chicago in september 1920 to live with friends .
in chicago , he worked as an associate editor of the monthly journal " cooperative commonwealth " .
when st . louis native hadley richardson came to chicago to visit hemingway 's sister , hemingway became infatuated .
bernice kert , author of " the hemingway women " , said hadley was " evocative " of agnes , but that hadley had a childishness that agnes lacked .
they wanted to visit rome , but sherwood anderson convinced them to visit paris instead , writing letters of introduction for the young couple .
hemingway 's marriage to hadley , hemingway said : " with hadley , hemingway achieved everything he had hoped for with agnes : the love of a beautiful woman , a comfortable income , a life in europe " .
hemingway 's first biographer , carlos baker , said that while anderson suggested paris because " the monetary exchange rate " made it an inexpensive place to live , more importantly it was where " the most interesting people in the world " lived .
the hemingway of the early paris years was a " tall , handsome , muscular , broad-shouldered , brown-eyed , rosy-cheeked , square-jawed young man . "
she introduced him to the montparnasse quarter , whom she referred to as the " lost generation " .
ezra pound met hemingway at sylvia beach 's bookshop shakespeare and company in 1922 .
the two toured italy in 1923 and lived on the same street in 1924 .
in hemingway , pound recognized and fostered a young talent .
he introduced hemingway to james joyce , with whom hemingway frequently went on " alcoholic sprees " .
he also wrote travel pieces such as " tuna fishing in spain " and " trout fishing all across europe : spain has the best , then germany " .
hemingway was devastated on learning that hadley had lost a suitcase filled with his manuscripts at the gare de lyon as she was traveling to geneva to meet him in december 1922 .
the following september , the couple returned to toronto , where their son john hadley nicanor was born on october 10,1923 .
hemingway 's first book , " three stories and ten poems " , was published in 1921 .
the third was written early the year in italy .
he missed paris , considered toronto boring , and wanted to return to the life of a writer , rather than live the life of a journalist .
hemingway helped ford madox ford edit " the transatlantic review " .
critics in the united states praised hemingway for his good use of declarative sentences .
hemingway read it , liked it , and decided his next work had to be a novel .
with his wife hadley , hemingway first visited the festival of san fermin in pamplona , spain , in 1923 .
he is referred to as " papa " , even by much older friends .
she did not remember how the nickname came into being ; however , it certainly stuck .
hemingway 's friend bill smith , donald ogden stewart , lady duff twysden , and her lover pat guthrie lived in pamplona until they divorced .
a few days after the fiesta ended , on july 21 , he began to write the draft of what would become " the sun also rises " , finishing eight weeks later .
pauline pfeiffer joined them in january and against hadley 's advice , urged hemingway to sign a contract with scribner 's .
hemingway himself later wrote to his editor max perkins that the " point of the book " was not so much about a generation being lost , but that " the earth abideth forever " ; he believed the characters in " the sun also rises " may have been " battered " but were not lost .
hemingway 's marriage to hadley became less serious as he was working on " the sun also rises " .
hadley and hadley agreed to take hemingway 's money from " the sun also rises " .
he planned his next collection of short stories , " men without women " , published in october 1927 .
"
john dos passos recommended key west , and they left paris in march 1928 .
hemingway suffered a severe injury in their paris bathroom when he pulled a skylight down on his head thinking he was pulling on a toilet chain .
after his birth , pauline and hemingway traveled to wyoming , massachusetts , and new york .
hemingway was devastated , having written to his father telling him not to worry about money .
he realized how hadley must have felt after her own father 's suicide in 1903 .
hemingway returned to key west in december .
he wanted to write a comprehensive treatise on bullfighting , explaining the " toreros " and " corridas " complete with glossaries and appendices , because he believed bullfighting was " of great tragic interest , being literally of life and death . "
his third son , gregory hancock hemingway , was born in 1931 .
pauline 's uncle bought the couple a house in key west with a carriage house .
while in key west , hemingway lived in the bar sloppy joe 's .
he invited friends to join him on fishing trips and on a all-male expedition to the dry tortugas .
in 1933 he wrote of key west , " we have a fine house here , and kids are all well " .
their guide was the noted " white hunter philip percival who had guided theodore roosevelt on his 1909 safari .
during these travels , hemingway got sick with amoebic dysentery that caused a prolapsed intestine .
hemingway returned to key west in early 1934 .
hemingway bought a boat in 1934 .
in 1935 he first arrived at bimini , where he spent a lot of time .
during this period he also worked on " to have and have not " , published in 1937 while he was in spain .
ivens was filming " the spanish earth " , a propaganda movie in support of the republican side .
like hadley , martha was a st . louis native , and like pauline , she had worked for " vogue " in paris .
of martha , kert explains , " she never catered to him the way other women did . "
hemingway wrote his only play , " the fifth column " , in 1937 .
he returned to key west for a few months , then back to spain twice in 1938 .
in early 1939 , hemingway went to cuba in his boat to live in the hotel ambos mundos in havana .
this was the separation phase of a slow and painful split from pauline , which began when hemingway met martha gellhorn .
pauline and the children left hemingway that summer , after the family was reunited during a visit to wyoming .
hemingway moved his summer home to ketchum , idaho , just outside the newly built resort of sun valley , and moved his winter home to cuba .
he had been disgusted when a parisian friend allowed his cats to eat from the table , but he became enamored of cats in cuba and kept dozens of them on the property .
he inspired the story to write his most famous novel " for whom the bell tolls " .
hemingway went with her , sending in dispatches for the newspaper " pm " , but in general he disliked china .
a 2009 book suggests that he may have been recruited to work for soviet intelligence agents under the name " agent argo " .
they returned to cuba before the declaration of war by the united states that december , when he convinced the cuban government to help him refit the " pilar " , which he intended to use to ambush german submarines off the coast of cuba .
hemingway was in europe from may 1944 to march 1945 .
when he arrived in london , he met " time " magazine correspondent mary welsh .
hemingway refused to help her get a press pass on a plane .
hemingway 's last time was in march 1945 as he was preparing to return to cuba .
hemingway accompanied the troops to the normandy landings wearing a large head bandage , according to meyers , but he was considered " precious cargo " and not allowed ashore .
hemingway later wrote in " collier 's " that he could see " the first , second , third , fourth and fifth waves of landing troops lay where they had fallen .
on august 25 , he was present at the liberation of paris as a journalist .
hemingway was awarded a bronze star in 1947 .
hemingway was recognized for having been " under fire in combat areas in order to get an accurate picture of conditions " .
in 1947 , a car accident left patrick with a head wound and severely ill .
hemingway began to die soon after , and the rest of his life was max perkins , hemingway 's long-time scribner 's editor and friend .
hemingway 's inability to continue was " a symptom of his troubles " during these years .
in 1948 , hemingway and mary traveled to europe .
the platonic love affair inspired the novel " across the river and into the trees " .
he wrote the draft of " the old man and the sea " in eight weeks , saying that it was " the best i can write ever for all of my life " .
on their way to photograph murchison falls from the air , the plane hit an abandoned utility pole and " crash landed in heavy brush " .
hemingway 's injuries included a head wound , while mary broke two ribs .
the next day , trying to reach medical care in entebbe , they boarded a second plane that exploded at take-off , with hemingway suffering burns and another concussion , which was serious enough to cause leaking of cerebral fluid .
despite his injuries , hemingway accompanied patrick and his wife on a fishing expedition in february .
months later in venice , mary reported to friends the full extent of hemingway 's injuries : two cracked discs , a kidney and liver rupture , a dislocated shoulder and a broken skull .
hemingway drank more heavily than usual to combat the pain of his injuries .
hemingway was awarded the nobel prize in literature in 1954 .
he modestly told the press that carl sandburg , isak dinesen and bernard berenson deserved the prize , but he refused to accept the prize money .
hemingway " had coveted the nobel prize " , but when he won it , months after his plane accidents and the worldwide press coverage , " there must have been a lingering suspicion in hemingway 's mind that his obituary notices had played a part in the academy 's decision . "
because he was suffering pain from the african accidents , he decided against traveling to stockholm .
during the trip , hemingway became sick again and was treated for " high blood pressure , liver disease , and arteriosclerosis " .
in november 1956 , while staying in paris , he reminded of trunks he had stored in the ritz hotel in 1928 and never retrieved .
when he was re-claiming and opening the trunks , hemingway discovered they were filled with notebooks and writing from his paris years .
excited about the discovery , when he returned to cuba in early 1957 , he began to shape the work into his memoir " a moveable feast " .
the last three were stored in a safe deposit box in havana , as he focused on the finishing touches for " a moveable feast " .
hemingway was not able to get into a depression , but he did not recover .
hemingway began to become unhappy with life there , considered a permanent move to idaho .
in 1959 he bought a home overlooking the big wood river , outside ketchum , and left cuba .
he was in cuba in 1959 , between returning from pamplona and traveling west to idaho , and the following year for his 61st birthday .
hemingway continued to work on the material that was published as " a moveable feast " through the 1950s .
he was unable to organize his writing for the first time in his life .
hotchner helped him trim the " life " piece down to 40,000 words , and scribner 's agreed to a full-length book version saying " the dangerous summer "arth .
hemingway and mary left cuba for the last time on july 25,1960 .
he set up a small office in his new york city apartment and attempted to work , but he left new york for good soon after .
he then traveled alone to spain to be photographed for the front cover of " life " magazine .
a few days later , the news reported that he was seriously ill and on the verge of dying , which panicked mary until she received a cable from him telling her , " reports false .
in october , he left spain for new york .
she quickly took him to idaho , where physician george saviers met them at the train .
he worried about his taxes and that he would never return to cuba to get the manuscripts that he had left in a bank vault .
he became paranoid , thinking that the fbi was actively monitoring his movements in ketchum .
the fbi had opened a file on him during world war ii .
by the end of november , mary was at her wits ' end .
meyers writes that " an aura of secrecy surrounds hemingway 's treatment at the mayo " .
hemingway was back in ketchum in april 1961 .
she called saviers , who sedated him and admitted him to the sun valley hospital .
he was released in late june and arrived home in june 30 , and he " quite deliberately " shot himself with his shotgun in the early morning hours of july 2,1961 .
he had unlocked the basement storeroom where his guns were kept , gone upstairs to the front entrance foyer , and shot himself with the " double-barreled shotgun that he had used so often it might have been a friend " .
bernice kert writes that it " did not seem to her a conscious lie " when she told the press that his death had been accidental .
in a press interview five years later , mary confirmed that he had shot himself .
hemingway 's brother , leicester , wrote : " it seemed to me ernest would have approved of it all . "
hemingway wrote " the sun also rises " .
hemingway was awarded the nobel prize in literature in 1954 .
henry louis gates believes hemingway 's style was fundamentally shaped " in reaction to his experience of world war " .
after world war i , he and other modernists " lost faith in the central institutions of western civilization " .
hemingway called his style the iceberg theory : the facts float above water ; the supporting structure and symbolism operate out of sight .
hemingway believed the writer could describe one thingtish like nick adams fishing in " the big two-hearted river "arth .
hemingway 's first book , " in our time " , showed he was experimenting with his writing style .
hemingway used his experiences and drew them out with " what if i were wounded in such a way that i could not sleep at night ?
what if i were wounded and made crazy , what would happen if i were sent back to the front ? "
if you leave out important things or events that you know about , the story is strengthened .
if you leave or skip something because you do not know it , the story will be worthless .
zoe trodd believes hemingway crafted skeletal sentences in response to henry james 's observation that world war i had " used up words " .
he also uses other cinematic techniques of " cutting " quickly from one scene to the next , or of " splicing " a scene into another .
intentional omissions allow the reader to fill the gap , as though responding to instructions from the author , and create three-dimensional prose .
hemingway habitually used the word " and " in place of commas .
many of hemingway 's followers misinterpreted his lead and frowned upon all expression of emotion ; saul bellow satirized this style as " do you have emotions ?
hemingway 's intent was to eliminate emotion , but to portray it more scientifically .
hemingway thought it would be easy , and pointless , to describe emotions .
hemingway 's work depends on its themes of love , war , wilderness , and loss .
the american west is given a symbolic nod with the naming of the " hotel montana " in " the sun also rises " and " for whom the bell tolls " .
hemingway 's work says that nature is a place for rebirth and rest .
although hemingway does write about sports , such as fishing , carlos baker notes the emphasis is more on the athlete than the sport .
hemingway 's work can be seen in the light of american naturalism .
fiedler believes hemingway inverts the american literary theme of the evil " dark woman " versus the good " light woman " .
some early hemingway stories , such as " a very short story " , present " a male character favorably and a female unfavorably " .
hemingway said that early hemingway hemingway -lrb- early -rrb- liked his male-centric world of male pursuits , and the fiction divided women into " castrators or love-slaves " .
nina baym believes that brett ashley and margot macomber are the two best examples of hemingway 's ' bitch women .
the theme of women and death is evident in stories as early as " indian camp " .
young believes the emphasis in " indian camp " was not so much on the woman who gives birth or the father who kills himself , but on nick adams who witnesses these events as a child , and becomes a " badly scarred and nervous young man " .
young believes " indian camp " holds the master key to " what its author was up to for some thirty-five years of his writing career " .
stoltzfus considers hemingway 's work to be more complex .
those who face death with dignity and courage live an authentic life .
fiedler says that many women had their own generation , including the women who had been hurt , and that women had become slaves .
this also applies to the minor character , frances clyne , cohn 's girlfriend in the beginning in the book .
her character supports the theme not only because the idea was presented early on in the novel but also the impact she had on cohn in the start of the book while only appearing a small number of times .
in alpine idyll the " unnaturalness " of skiing in the high country late spring snow is juxtaposed against the " unnaturalness " of the peasant who allowed his wife 's dead body to linger too long in the shed during the winter .
she also found that " critics interested in multiculturalism " , particularly in the 1980s , simply ignored hemingway , although some " apologetics " have been written .
hemingway 's 1926 novel " the sun also rises " , in which a critic said : " hemingway never lets the reader forget that cohn is a jew , not an unattractive character who happens to be a jew but a character who is unattractive because he is a jew " .
also during the 1980s , criticism was published that was focused on investigating the horror of homosexuality and the " racism " typical of the social era played in hemingway 's fiction .
hemingway 's legacy to american literature is his style : writers who came after him emulated it or avoided it .
after his reputation was established with the publication of " the sun also rises " , he became the spokesperson for the post-world war i generation .
his books were burned in berlin in 1933 , " as being a monument of modern decadence " , and disavowed by his parents as " filth " .
hemingway 's legacy is that " hemingway left stories and novels so starkly moving that some have become part of our cultural heritage . "
in a letter to hemingway , salinger said that he gave him his only hopeful minutes of the entire war .
ray bradbury wrote " the kilimanjaro device " , with hemingway transported to the top of mount kilimanjaro .
hemingway 's son jack bumby aston has pieces such as the " kilimanjaro " bedside table , and a " catherine " slip-covered sofa .
entrants are encouraged to submit one " really good page of really bad hemingway " .
in 1980 , a group of hemingway scholars gathered to find the hemingways ' papers .
her death was ruled as a suicide by the nazis .
hemingway is on the u . s . national register of historic places : the ernest hemingway cottage on walloon lake , michigan , designated in 1968 ; the ernest hemingway house in key west , designated in 1968 ; and the ernest and mary hemingway house in ketchum , designated in 2015 .
his boyhood home is a museum and archive dedicated to hemingway .