the garden of edentify hebrew : גן ־ עדן-" gan-ʿeden " , also called paradise , is the biblical " garden of god " described in the book of ezekiel .
genesis 13 : 10 refers to the " garden of god " , and the " trees of the garden " are mentioned in ezekiel 31 .
the book of zechariah and the book of psalms also refer to trees and water without explicitly mentioning eden .
the name comes from the sumerian word " edin " , which means " plain " or " steppe " .
another version of the name is the hebrew word for " pleasure " .
the hebrew term is translated as " pleasure " in sarah 's secret saying in .
like the genesis flood narrative , the story of eden is like a king , as a man placed in a divine garden to guard the tree of life .
adam and eve are walking around the garden of eden .
the location of eden is described in the book of genesis as the source of four tributaries .
the garden of eden is considered to be a mythological .
there have been various suggestions for its location : at the head of the persian gulf , in southern mesopotamia paces now iraq iraq <unk> where the tigris and euphrates rivers run into the sea ; and in armenia .
the second part of the genesis creation narrative , opens with yhwh-elohim translate here " the lord god " , see names of god in judaism .
the tree of life also comes in the midst of the garden , and the tree of knowledge of good and evil .
the man was free to eat from any tree in the garden except the tree of knowledge .
last of all , the man made eve9th from a rib of the man to be a companion for the man .
in chapter three , the man and the woman were seduced by the serpent into eating the forbidden fruit .
cherubim were placed east of the garden , and a flaming sword which turned every way , to guard the way of the tree of life .
the " paradisus terrestris " is in takab in northeastern iran .
ezekiel , the son of man , is a god 's name .
but the king sinned through wickedness and violence , and so he was driven out of the garden and thrown to the earth , where now he is consumed by god 's fire : " all those who knew you in the nations are appalled at you , you have come to a horrible end and will be no more . "
according to terje stordalen , the eden in ezekiel appears to be located in lebanon .
" it appears that the lebanon is an alternative placement in phoenician mythologies as in ez 28,13 , iii . 48zong of the garden of eden " .
edward lipinski and peter kyle mccarter suggested that the garden of the godstify sumerian paradise amounted to a mountain sanctuary in the lebanon and anti-lebanon ranges .
the garden of eden is considered to be a mythological .
at its source of the rivers , while others have looked at the head of the persian gulf , in southern mesopotamiacek now iraqcek where the tigris and euphrates rivers run into the sea .
british archaeologist david rohl locates it in iran , and in the vicinity of tabriz .
in the talmud and the jewish kabbalah , the scholars agree that there are two types of spiritual places called " garden in eden " .
the first is rather terrestrial , of abundant fertility and luxuriant vegetation , known as the " lower gan eden " .
the second is envisioned as being celestial , the habitation of righteous , jewish and non-jewish immortal souls , known as the " higher gan eden " .
the rabbis are different from gan .
adam is said to have dwelt only in the gan , whereas eden is said never to be witnessed by any mortal eye .
according to jewish eschatology , the higher gan eden is called the " garden of righteousness " .
it has been created since the beginning of the world , and will appear gloriously at the end of time .
the righteous home there will enjoy the sight of the heavenly " chayot " carrying the throne of god .
they will lead them in a dance .
the jewish people are " clothed with garments of light and eternal life , and eat of the tree of life " enoch enoch 58,3cifully near to god and his anointed ones .
this is opposed by the hebrew terms " gehinnom " and " sheol " .
in modern judaism , it is believed that history will complete itself and the ultimate destination will be when all mankind returns to the garden of eden .
in the 19th century book " legends of the jews " , louis ginzberg wrote about jewish legends of the jews .
some of the legends are about the two gardens of eden .
beyond paradise is the higher gan eden , where god is enthroned and explains the torah to its people .
the higher gan eden has three hundred ten worlds and is divided into seven compartments .
the compartments are not described .
the first compartment is for jewish martyrs , the second for those who drowned , the third for those who the cloud of glory carried off , the fifth for penitents who have never sinned ; and the seventh for the poor who lived and studied the torah .
in chapter two , the jewish people say that the lower gan eden was the same as the god .
the tree of knowledge is a hedge around the tree of life .
from beneath the trees flow all the world 's waters in the form of four rivers : tigris , nile , euphrates , and ganges .
after the fall of man , the world was no longer irrigated by this water .
while in the garden , adam and eve were served meat dishes by angels and the animals of the world understood human language , respected mankind as god 's image , and feared adam and eve .
when one dies , one 's soul must pass through the lower gan eden in order to reach the higher gan eden .
the way to the garden is the cave of machpelah that adam guards .
the cave is guarded by a cherub with a flaming sword .
if a soul is unworthy of entering , the sword will annihilate it .
in the garden is a pillar of fire and smoke that goes to the higher gan eden .
the term " jannat ʿadni " is used in the qur ' an for the destination of the righteous .
there are several mentions of " the garden " in the qur ' an aarhus 2 : 35,7 : 19,20 : 117bornen , while the garden of eden , without the word " ʿadn " , is commonly the fourth layer of the islamic heaven .
the quran refers frequently over various surat about the first abode of adam and hawwampton eve opener , including surat sad , which has 18 verses on the subjectological studies .
the story mainly shows the expulsion of hawwa and adam after they were tempted by shaitan .
despite the bible , the quran mentions only one tree in eden , the tree of immortality .
adam and eve were told to eat from the tree .
these stories are also featured in the hadith collections , including al-tabari .
followers of the latter day saints movement believe that after adam and eve were expelled from the garden of eden they resided in a place known as adam-ondi-ahman , located in present-day daviess county , missouri .
it is recorded in the doctrine and covenants that adam blessed his posterity there and that he will return to that place at the time of the final judgment in fulfillment of a prophecy set forth in the book of mormon .
many early leaders of the church , including brigham young , heber c . kimball , and george q . cannon , taught that the garden of eden was located in nearby jackson county , missouri , but there are no surviving first-hand accounts of that doctrine being taught by joseph smith himself .
lds doctrine is unclear as to the exact location of the garden of eden , but tradition among latter-day saints places it somewhere in the vicinity of adam-ondi-ahman , or in jackson county .
the garden of eden motifs often appears in illuminated manuscripts and paintings are the " sleep of adam " lilith " creation of eve "lity , the temptation of eve by the serpent , the " fall of man " where adam takes the fruit , and the " expulsion " .
the idyll of " naming day in eden " was less often shown .
milton 's paradise lost is in the garden of eden .
michelangelo painted the garden of eden in the sistine chapel ceiling .
dante places the garden at the top of the purgatory .
for many medieval writers , the image of the garden of eden creates a place for human love and sexuality , often associated with the classic and medieval trope of the locus amoenus .
the city was under byzantine control .
a preserved blue mosaic is part of the mausoleum of galla placidia .
circular motifs represent flowers of the garden of eden .
