the garden of edentify hebrew : גן ־ עדן-" gan-ʿeden " , also called paradise , is the biblical " garden of god " described in the book of ezekiel .
genesis 13 : 10 refers to the " garden of god " , and the " trees of the garden " are mentioned in ezekiel 31 .
the book of zechariah and the book of psalms also refer to trees and water without explicitly mentioning eden .
the hebrew term is translated as " pleasure " in sarah 's secret saying in .
like the genesis flood narrative , the story of eden is like a king , as a man placed in a divine garden to guard the tree of life .
adam and eve are walking around the garden of eden .
the location of eden is described in the book of genesis as the source of four tributaries .
the garden of eden is considered to be a mythological .
there have been various suggestions for its location : at the head of the persian gulf , in southern mesopotamia paces now iraq iraq <unk> where the tigris and euphrates rivers run into the sea ; and in armenia .
the second part of the genesis creation narrative , opens with yhwh-elohim translate here " the lord god " , see names of god in judaism .
the tree of life also comes in the midst of the garden , and the tree of knowledge of good and evil .
the man was free to eat from any tree in the garden except the tree of knowledge .
in chapter three , the man and the woman were seduced by the serpent into eating the forbidden fruit .
cherubim were placed east of the garden , and a flaming sword which turned every way , to guard the way of the tree of life .
but the king sinned through wickedness and violence , and so he was driven out of the garden and thrown to the earth , where now he is consumed by god 's fire : " all those who knew you in the nations are appalled at you , you have come to a horrible end and will be no more . "
at its source of the rivers , while others have looked at the head of the persian gulf , in southern mesopotamiacek now iraqcek where the tigris and euphrates rivers run into the sea .
in the talmud and the jewish kabbalah , the scholars agree that there are two types of spiritual places called " garden in eden " .
the first is rather terrestrial , of abundant fertility and luxuriant vegetation , known as the " lower gan eden " .
the second is envisioned as being celestial , the habitation of righteous , jewish and non-jewish immortal souls , known as the " higher gan eden " .
adam is said to have dwelt only in the gan , whereas eden is said never to be witnessed by any mortal eye .
it has been created since the beginning of the world , and will appear gloriously at the end of time .
the jewish people are " clothed with garments of light and eternal life , and eat of the tree of life " enoch enoch 58,3cifully near to god and his anointed ones .
in modern judaism , it is believed that history will complete itself and the ultimate destination will be when all mankind returns to the garden of eden .
in the 19th century book " legends of the jews " , louis ginzberg wrote about jewish legends of the jews .
some of the legends are about the two gardens of eden .
beyond paradise is the higher gan eden , where god is enthroned and explains the torah to its people .
from beneath the trees flow all the world 's waters in the form of four rivers : tigris , nile , euphrates , and ganges .
while in the garden , adam and eve were served meat dishes by angels and the animals of the world understood human language , respected mankind as god 's image , and feared adam and eve .
when one dies , one 's soul must pass through the lower gan eden in order to reach the higher gan eden .
in the garden is a pillar of fire and smoke that goes to the higher gan eden .
there are several mentions of " the garden " in the qur ' an aarhus 2 : 35,7 : 19,20 : 117bornen , while the garden of eden , without the word " ʿadn " , is commonly the fourth layer of the islamic heaven .
the quran refers frequently over various surat about the first abode of adam and hawwampton eve opener , including surat sad , which has 18 verses on the subjectological studies .
despite the bible , the quran mentions only one tree in eden , the tree of immortality .
followers of the latter day saints movement believe that after adam and eve were expelled from the garden of eden they resided in a place known as adam-ondi-ahman , located in present-day daviess county , missouri .
it is recorded in the doctrine and covenants that adam blessed his posterity there and that he will return to that place at the time of the final judgment in fulfillment of a prophecy set forth in the book of mormon .
the garden of eden motifs often appears in illuminated manuscripts and paintings are the " sleep of adam " lilith " creation of eve "lity , the temptation of eve by the serpent , the " fall of man " where adam takes the fruit , and the " expulsion " .
milton 's paradise lost is in the garden of eden .
for many medieval writers , the image of the garden of eden creates a place for human love and sexuality , often associated with the classic and medieval trope of the locus amoenus .