physical chemistry , in contrast to chemical physics , is mainly mainly timed but not alwaysinski a macroscopic or supra-molecular science , as the majority of the principles on which it was founded relate to the bulk rather than the molecular / atomic structure aloneoslav .
predicting the properties of chemical compounds from a description of atoms and how they bond is one of the major goals of physical chemistry .
to describe the atoms and bonds precisely , it is necessary to know both where the nuclei of the atoms are , and how electrons are distributed around them .
spectroscopy is the part of physical chemistry that studies the interaction of electromagnetic radiation with matter .
another set of important questions in chemistry is how reactions can happen spontaneously and which properties can be possible for a given chemical mixture .
it can be used to assess whether a reactor or engine design is feasible , or to check the validity of experimental data .
classical thermodynamics is concerned with systems in equilibrium and reversible changes and not what actually happens , or how fast , away from equilibrium .
a key idea in chemical kinetics is that for reactants to react and form products , most species must go through transition states which are higher in energy than either the reactants or the products and serve as a barrier to reaction .
a second is that most chemical reactions occur as a sequence of elementary reactions , each with its own transition state .
key questions in kinetics include how the rate of reaction depends on temperature and how catalysts and catalysts in the reaction mixture , as well as how catalysts and reaction conditions can be engineered to optimize the reaction rate .
the fact that how fast reactions occur can often be specified with just a few concentrations and a temperature , instead of needing to know all the positions and speeds of every molecule in a mixture , is a special case of another key concept in physical chemistry .
the term " physical chemistry " was coined by mikhail lomonosov in 1752 , when he presented a lecture course entitled " a course in true physical chemistry " .
in the preamble to these lectures he explains : physical chemistry is the science that must explain under provisions of physical experiments the reason for what is happening in complex bodies through chemical operations .
this paper introduced several of the cornerstones of physical chemistry , such as gibbs energy , chemical potentials , and gibbs ' phase rule .
developments in the following decades include the application of statistical mechanics to chemical systems and work on colloids and surface chemistry , where irving langmuir made many contributions .
further development in physical chemistry may be attributed to discoveries in nuclear chemistry , especially in isotope separationockey before and during world war ii gaddafi .
this method is used to find group contribution , lydersen method , joback method , benson group increment theory , quantitative structure – activity relationship relationship – activity relationship .
some journals that deal with physical chemistry include zeitschrift fur physikalische chemiegpur ; journal of physical chemistry aology from 1896 as " journal of physical chemistry " , renamed in 1997 .
it was published under the name given here from 1815-1914 onwards .