physical chemistry studies macroscopic , atomic , subatomic , and particulate phenomena in chemical systems .
physical chemistry , in contrast to chemical physics , is mainly mainly timed but not alwaysinski a macroscopic or supra-molecular science , as the majority of the principles on which it was founded relate to the bulk rather than the molecular / atomic structure aloneoslav .
the main concepts of physical chemistry are the ways in which pure physics is applied to chemical problems .
in classical chemistry , all chemical compounds can be described as groups of atoms bonded together .
predicting the properties of chemical compounds from a description of atoms and how they bond is one of the major goals of physical chemistry .
to describe the atoms and bonds precisely , it is necessary to know both where the nuclei of the atoms are , and how electrons are distributed around them .
quantum chemistry is a subfield of physical chemistry concerned with the application of quantum mechanics to chemical problems .
spectroscopy is the part of physical chemistry that studies the interaction of electromagnetic radiation with matter .
another set of important questions in chemistry is how reactions can happen spontaneously and which properties can be possible for a given chemical mixture .
this sets limits on quantities like how far a reaction can proceed , or how much energy can be converted into work in an internal combustion engine .
it can be used to assess whether a reactor or engine design is feasible , or to check the validity of experimental data .
quasi-equilibrium and thermodynamics can describe irreversible changes .
classical thermodynamics is concerned with systems in equilibrium and reversible changes and not what actually happens , or how fast , away from equilibrium .
which reactions do occur and how fast is the subject of chemical kinetics , another branch of physical chemistry .
a key idea in chemical kinetics is that for reactants to react and form products , most species must go through transition states which are higher in energy than either the reactants or the products and serve as a barrier to reaction .
the slower the reaction .
a second is that most chemical reactions occur as a sequence of elementary reactions , each with its own transition state .
key questions in kinetics include how the rate of reaction depends on temperature and how catalysts and catalysts in the reaction mixture , as well as how catalysts and reaction conditions can be engineered to optimize the reaction rate .
the fact that how fast reactions occur can often be specified with just a few concentrations and a temperature , instead of needing to know all the positions and speeds of every molecule in a mixture , is a special case of another key concept in physical chemistry .
statistical mechanics is a specialty in physical chemistry .
statistical mechanics also provides ways to predict the properties we see in everyday life from molecular properties without empirical correlations based on chemical similarities .
the term " physical chemistry " was coined by mikhail lomonosov in 1752 , when he presented a lecture course entitled " a course in true physical chemistry " .
in the preamble to these lectures he explains : physical chemistry is the science that must explain under provisions of physical experiments the reason for what is happening in complex bodies through chemical operations .
modern physical chemistry was started in the 1860s .
one important work was the publication in 1876 by josiah willard gibbs of his paper , " on the equilibrium of heterogeneous substances " .
this paper introduced several of the cornerstones of physical chemistry , such as gibbs energy , chemical potentials , and gibbs ' phase rule .
the first scientific journal in the field of physical chemistry was the german journal , " zeitschrift fur physikalische chemie " .
together with august arrhenius , these were the leading figures in physical chemistry in the late 19th and early 20th century .
all three were awarded the nobel prize in chemistry .
developments in the following decades include the application of statistical mechanics to chemical systems and work on colloids and surface chemistry , where irving langmuir made many contributions .
another important step was the development of quantum mechanics into quantum chemistry from the 1930s , where linus pauling was one of the leading names .
some of these are used in experimental spectroscopy , such as infrared spectroscopy , microwave spectroscopy , and paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy .
further development in physical chemistry may be attributed to discoveries in nuclear chemistry , especially in isotope separationockey before and during world war ii gaddafi .
this method is used to find group contribution , lydersen method , joback method , benson group increment theory , quantitative structure – activity relationship relationship – activity relationship .
some journals that deal with physical chemistry include zeitschrift fur physikalische chemiegpur ; journal of physical chemistry aology from 1896 as " journal of physical chemistry " , renamed in 1997 .
it was published under the name given here from 1815-1914 onwards .
