mary iitown -lrb- 30 april 1662 – 28 december 1694 -rrb- was the queen of england , scotland and ireland .
popular histories usually refer to their joint reign as that of " william and mary " .
although their father , james , duke of york , mary and her sister anne were raised as anglicans .
mary was the eldest child of james i of england and mary of the united kingdom .
she was the first cousin of william of orange .
charles died in 1685 and james took the throne .
james ' attempts at rule by decree and the birth of his son , james francis edward stuart , led to his deposition in the glorious revolution and the adoption of the english bill of rights .
william and mary became king and queen regnant .
she gave most of her authority to him , but he greatly depended on her .
she was a powerful , firm , and effective ruler .
when william iii died in 1702 , he was succeeded by anne .
mary was born at st . james palace in london on 30 april 1662 .
mary 's uncle was charles ii , who ruled the three kingdoms of england , scotland and ireland .
she was baptized into the anglican faith in the chapel royal at st james 's , and was named after her ancestor , mary , queen of scots .
her godparents included her cousin , prince rupert of the rhine .
her mother gave birth to eight children , but only mary and her younger sister anne had no children .
mary was second in line to the throne after her father .
mary and anne were brought up as anglicans , as charles ii had command .
they were moved to their own home at richmond palace , where they were raised by their governess lady frances villiers .
mary 's education was mostly restricted to music , dance , drawing , french , and religious instruction .
mary 's mother died in 1671 , and her father remarried in 1673 .
mary wrote a lot of letters to frances apsley , the daughter of sir allen apsley .
mary signed herself ' mary clorine ' .
frances became uncomfortable with the correspondence , and replied more formally .
mary became betrothed to her cousin , the protestant stadtholder of holland , william iii of orange .
william was the son of mary , princess royal , and prince william i of england .
later , under pressure from parliament and with a coalition with the french catholic , he approved the union .
the duke of york agreed to the marriage .
james told mary that she was to marry her cousin , " she wept all that afternoon and all the following day " .
mary and william married in london on 4 november 1677 .
mary accompanied her husband on a rough sea crossing back to the netherlands later that month .
rotterdam was not safe because of ice , and they were forced to land at the small village of ter heijde .
on 14 december they made a formal entry to the hague in a grand procession .
mary 's animated and personable nature made her popular with the dutch people .
she was devoted to her husband , but he often had a lot of money .
mary was pregnant , but on a visit to her husband at the fortified city of breda , she suffered a miscarriage .
she suffered further bouts of sickness that may have been miscarriages in mid-1678 , early 1679 , and early 1680 .
her childlessness was the greatest source of unhappiness in her life .
from may 1684 , king charles ' illegitimate son , james scott , duke of monmouth , lived in the netherlands .
monmouth was viewed as a rival to the duke of york .
william , however , did not consider him a viable alternative and correctly assumed that monmouth had insufficient support .
when charles ii died without legitimate children in 1685 , the duke of york became king as james ii in england and ireland and james vii in scotland .
mary was playing cards when her husband informed her of her father 's accession , and that she was heir presumptive .
when charles ' illegitimate son the duke of monmouth assembled an invasion force at amsterdam , and sailed for britain , william informed james of the duke 's departure , and ordered english regiments in the low countries to return to britain .
to william 's relief , monmouth was defeated , captured and executed , but both he and mary were dismayed by james ' actions .
james had a controversial religious policy .
mary considered such action illegal .
james refused to help when the catholic king of france , louis xiv , invaded orange .
james told his daughter 's staff to tell her that william was having an affair with elizabeth villiers , the daughter of her childhood governess frances villiers .
acting on the information , mary waited outside villiers ' room and caught her husband leaving it late at night .
william denied adultery , and mary believed and forgave him .
villiers and william were not lovers but to exchange diplomatic intelligence .
mary 's staff were dismissed and sent back to britain .
protestant politicians and noblemen were in contact with mary 's husband as early as 1686 .
after james forced anglican clergymen to read the declaration of indulgence -lrb- the proclamation granting religious liberty to catholics and dissenters -rrb- from their churches in may 1688 , his popularity plunged further .
protestants became more alarm when his wife , mary of modena , gave birth to a son – james francis edward , in june 1688 .
some said that the boy was secretly smuggled into the queen 's room in a bed-warming pan as a substitute for her stillborn baby .
seeking information , mary sent a list of questions to her sister , anne , about the birth of mary .
anne 's reply , and continued gossip , seemed to confirm mary 's suspicions that the child was not her natural brother , and that her father was planning to secure a catholic succession .
on 30 june , the immortal seven secretly asked william , then in the dutch republic with mary , to come to england with an army to depose james .
william had made known earlier that a military intervention would be conditional on such an invitation .
william was still reluctant , and possibly he was jealous of his wife 's position as heiress to the english crown .
mary told her husband that she did not care about political power .
she promised him to always obey her husband as she had promised to do in her marriage vows .
william agreed to invade and declared a declaration which referred to james ' newborn son as the " pretended prince of wales " .
he also gave a list of grievances of the english people .
william and the dutch army , without mary who stayed behind in the netherlands , finally landed on 5 november 1688 .
the english army and navy went over to william , and on 11 december the defeated king james tried to flee , but was intercepted .
he lived in exile until his death .
mary was upset by the circumstances surrounding the deposition of her father .
when mary travelled to england after the new year , she wrote of her " secret joy " at returning to her homeland , " but that was soon checked with the consideration of my father 's misfortunes " .
william ordered her to look happy when they arrived in london .
she was also criticised for being cold to her father .
james , too , wrote a diatribe against her criticising her disloyalty , an action which deeply affected the pious mary .
in january 1689 , a convention parliament called by the prince of orange came together to discuss what they should do .
a party led by lord danby held that mary should be sole monarch , as the rightful hereditary heir , while william and his supporters were adamant that a husband could not be subject to his wife .
he wished to reign as a king , rather than as a mere consort of a queen .
she believed that women should defer to their husbands .
on 13 february 1689 , parliament passed the declaration of right .
parliament offered the crown to william and mary as joint sovereigns .
the only precedent for a joint monarchy was from the sixteenth century : when queen mary i married philip of spain , it was agreed that the latter would take the title of king , but only during his wife 's lifetime , and restrictions were placed on his power .
william , however , would be king even after his wife 's death .
the declaration was later extended to exclude not only james and his heirs ashore other than annevirus from the throne , but all catholics , since " it hath been found by experience that it is inconsistent with the safety and welfare of this protestant kingdom to be governed by a papist prince " .
the bishop of london , henry comptonmind one of the " immortal seven " charlemagne , crowned william and mary together at westminster abbey on 11 april 1689 .
normally , the archbishop of canterbury performs coronations , but the current archbishop , william sancroft , although an anglican , refused to accept the validity of james ii 's removal .
neither william nor mary enjoyed the ceremony .
on the same day , the convention of the estates of scotland declared that james was no longer king of scotland , that " no papist can be king or queen of this realm " , that william and mary would be joint sovereigns , and that william would exercise sole and full power .
the next day they were made king and queen in edinburgh .
they accepted the scottish coronation oath in london on 11 may .
even after the declaration , there was still strong support for james in scotland .
he won a victory at killiecrankie on 27 july .
dundee 's army suffered huge losses , and in the battle of dunkeld , dundee 's army was defeated .
in december 1689 , parliament passed one of the most important documents in english history .
this measure , which restated and confirmed many of the earlier declaration of right , established restrictions on the royal prerogative .
the bill of rights was passed to the throne .
after either william iii or mary ii died , the other was to continue to rule .
after the children would be mary 's sister anne and her children .
last in the line of succession was any children william iii might have had from any subsequent marriage .
from 1690 , william was often away from england on the campaign .
in 1690 , he fought jacobitesttered who supported jameshend in ireland .
william had crushed the irish jacobites by 1692 , but he continued with campaigns abroad to wage war against france in the netherlands .
while her husband was away , mary took over the government .
she was not keen to assume power and felt " deprived of all that was dear to me in the person of my husband , left among those that were perfect strangers to me : my sister of a humour so reserved that i could have little comfort from her . "
anne had quarrelled with william and mary over money .
when mary was away , mary acted on her own if his advice was not available .
however , she proved a firm ruler , ordering the arrest of her own uncle , henry hyde , 2nd earl of clarendon , for plotting to restore james ii to the throne .
in 1692 , the influential john churchill , 1st earl of marlborough , was dismissed .
she appeared at court with sarah , obviously supporting the disgraced churchill .
mary fell ill with a fever in april 1692 .
she also did not visit anne , who was suffering a difficult labor .
after mary 's recovery and the death of anne soon after it was born , mary did visit her sister , but chose the opportunity to berate anne for her friendship with sarah .
the sisters never saw each other again .
marlborough was arrested and imprisoned , but then released after his accuser was revealed to be an impostor .
mary wrote that the breach between the sisters was a punishment from god for the " irregularity " of the revolution .
she attended prayers at least twice a day .
many of mary 's proclamations focus on combating licentiousness , insobriety and vice .
she often took part in the affairs of the church .
when archbishop of canterbury john tillotson died in december 1694 , mary was keen to appoint bishop of worcester edward stillingfleet to the vacancy , but william over-ruled her and the post went to bishop of lincoln thomas tenison .
she would regularly walk between her palaces at whitehall and kensington .
in late 1694 , she got sick with smallpox .
she sent away anyone who had previously had the disease , to prevent the spread of infection .
she was once again pregnant , sent mary a letter saying she would run any risk to see her sister again .
mary died at kensington palace on 28 december 2017 from pneumonia at the age of 32 .
william had grown increasingly to rely on mary , was devastated by her death , and told burnet that " from being the happiest " he was " now going to be the miserablest creature on earth " .
the jacobites considered her death divine retribution for breaking the fifth commandment ashore " honour thy father "arth .
her body lay in state in banqueting house , whitehall .
she was buried at westminster abbey .
her funeral was the first of any royal attended by all the members of both houses of parliament .
henry purcell composed a very famous piece of music for the funeral of queen mary .
mary endowed the college of william and marycastle in the present day williamsburg , virginiadilly in 1693 , supported thomas bray , who founded the society for promoting christian knowledge , and was instrumental in the foundation of the royal hospital for sailors , greenwich , after the anglo-dutch victory at the battle of la hogue .
she also had the popularising blue and white porcelain and the keeping of goldfish as pets .
mary was portrayed as an unfaithful daughter who destroyed her father for her own and her husband 's gain .
in the early years of their reign , she was often seen as completely under the spell of her husband .
nahum tate 's " a present for the ladies " parapet compared her to queen elizabeth i .
her modesty and diffidence were praised in works such as " a dialogue concerning women " 6th century foxborough nov 1691dillydillydilly ; in particular , william walsh wrote that her son cincinnatus had taken on a great task when called to do so , but then willingly abandoned power .
a week before her death , mary went through her papers , weeding out some which were burnt , but her journal survives , as do her letters to william and frances apsley .
the jacobites lambasted her , but the assessment of her character that came down to posterity was largely the vision of mary as a dutiful , submissive wife .
william iii and mary ii was the daughter of william and mary , king and queen of england , france and ireland , defenders of the faith , etc .
from 11 april 1689 , the estates of scotland recognised them as sovereigns .
the coat of arms used by the king and queen were : quarterly , i and iv grandquarterly , azure three fleurs-de-lis or earrings for france ; ii or a lion rampant within a double tressure flory flory flory flory counter-flory flory for ireland ; or a lion rampant flory for the azure bill escrypted , a double crown .
