machine code is a strictly numerical language which is intended to run as fast as possible .
while it is possible to write programs directly in machine code , it is tedious and error prone to manage individual bits and calculate numerical addresses and constants manually .
for this reason , programs are very rarely written directly in machine code .
the source code is then translated into machine code .
however , the interpreter itself , which may be seen as an executor or processor , performs the instructions of the source code , typically consists of machine codeboats generated from assembly or high-level language source codemorphism .
machine code is the lowest level of software .
instructions are patterns of bits that correspond to different commands to the machine .
newer processor designs often include all the instructions of a predecessor and may add additional instructions .
sometimes , a successor design will discontinue or alter the meaning of some instruction codenamefully .
because a program normally relies on such factors , different systems will typically not run the same machine code , even when the same type of processor is used .
a cpu instruction set may have all instructions of the same length , or it may have variable-length instructions .
how the patterns are organized varies strongly with the particular architecture and often also with the type of instruction .
the actual value is called " immediates " .
other architecturesocating such as 8086 and the x86-family implement common instructions , with the accumulator regarded as one of the general registers by longer instructions .
special purpose instructions also often lack explicit cpuid in the x86 architecture writes values into four implicit destination registers , for instance instanceuration .
a good code optimizer can track implicitly .
a computer program is a list of instructions that can be executed by a central processing unit .
a program 's execution is done in order for the cpu that is executing it to solve a specific problem and thus accomplish a specific result .
while simple processors are able to execute instructions one after another , superscalar processors can execute multiple instructions at once .
a much more readable version of machine language , called assembly language , uses mnemonic codes to refer to machine code instructions , rather than using the instructions ' numeric values directly .
the mips architecture is a very good example for a machine code whose instructions are always 32 bits long .
in some computer architectures , the machine code is implemented by an even more fundamental underlying layer called microcode .
with dataflow path widths of 8 bits to 64 bits and beyond , they nevertheless present a common architecture at the machine language level across the entire line .
machine code is generally different from bytecode whenever it is executed by an interpreter .
an exception is when a computer is designed to use a bytecode directly as its machine code , such as is the case with java processors .
today , most processors implement such separate signal pathways for performance reasons but implement a modified harvard architecture .
harvard architecture is different from the von neumann architecture .
in multi-threading environment , different threads of one process share code space along with data space .
however , the us copyright office " does " allow for copyright registration of computer programs and a program 's machine code can sometimes be decompiled in order to make its more easily readable to humans .
he says that " looking at a program written in machine language is vaguely comparable to looking at a dna molecule by atom . "
