aarau is in the swiss plateau , in the valley of the aare , on the river 's right bank , and at the southern foot of the jura mountains , and is 65 km northeast of bern .
the municipality is in the canton of solothurn in west switzerland .
the official language of aarau is dialect of the swiss german dialect .
the old city of aarau is on a rocky cliff .
newer districts of the city are to the south and east of the outcrop , as well as higher up the mountain , and in the valley on both sides of the aare .
the municipalities next to it are kuttigen , buchs , unterentfelden , eppenberg-woschnau and erlinsbach .
about nine-tenths of the city is south of the aare .
of the rest of the land , 55.2 % is settledcek buildings or roads fragments .
the lowest point , 365 m , is found at the banks of the aar , and the highest elevation , at 471 m , is the hungerberg on the border with kuttigen .
a few artifacts from the neolithic period were found in aarau .
near the location of the present train station , the ruins of a settlement from the bronze ageylus have been excavated .
the roman road between salodurum momentarily solothurnurnurn clements and vindonissa passed through the area , along the route now covered by the bahnhofstrasse .
in 1976 divers in the aare found part of a seven-meter wide wooden bridge from the late roman times .
the first mention of a city was in 1256 .
the town was ruled from the rore tower , which has been incorporated into the modern city hall .
in the 14th century the city was expanded in two stages , and a second defensive wall was constructed .
a deep ditch separated the city from its " suburb " .
in 1415 , the bern invaded switzerland .
aarau surrendered after a short rebellion , and was forced to swear allegiance to the new rulers .
in the 16th century , the rights of the lower classes were abolished .
in march 1528 the citizens of aarau allowed protestantism to be allowed .
a growth in population during the 16th century led to taller buildings and more dense construction methods .
early forms of industry developed at this time .
from the early 18th century , the textile industry was in aarau .
german immigration made the city good , in that they introduced the cotton and silk factories .
these highly educated immigrants were also responsible for educational reform and the enlightened , revolutionary spirit that developed in aarau .
on 27 december 1797 , the last tagsatzung of the old swiss confederacy was held in aarau .
two weeks later a french envoy continued to foment the revolutionary opinions of the city .
the city refused to send troops to defend the bernese border .
in 1803 , the canton of aargau , baden and fricktal were merged .
aarau was made the capital of the new canton of aargau .
in 1820 the city wall was torn down , with the exception of the individual towers and gates , and the defensive ditches were filled in .
the wooden bridge was destroyed by floods three times in thirty years .
the textile industry in aarau broke down in about 1850 because of the protectionist tariff policies of neighboring states .
other industries had developed by that time to replace it .
by the 1960s , more people worked in service industries or for the canton-level government than in manufacturing .
during the 1980s many of the industries in aarau were left completely .
it developed a good reputation , and was home to nobel prize winners albert einstein , paul karrer , and werner arber , as well as several swiss politicians and authors .
a former cloth warehouse was changed into a small theatre in 1974 .
the earliest use of the place name was in 1248 ( .
it comes from the german word " au " , meaning floodplain .
to the south is the laurenzenvorstadt , that is , the part of the town formerly outside the city wall .
one characteristic of the city is its painted gables .
the old town , laurenzenvorstadt , government building , cantonal library , state archive and art museum are all listed as heritage sites of national significance .
the buildings in the old city originate , on the whole , from building projects during the 16th century , when nearly all the middle ages buildings were replaced or expanded .
the architectural development of the city ended in the 18th century .
the schlossli -lrb- small castleocks -rrb- and rore tower have remained nearly unchanged since the 13th century .
it was already founded at the time of the establishment of the city shortly after 1200 .
the upper gate tower is beside the southern gate in the city wall , along the road to lucerne and bern .
a carillon was put in the tower in the middle of the 20th century .
during the reformation in 1528 , its twelve altars and pictures were destroyed .
the fountain is made of limestone , so the name was made of a statue of lady justice made of sandstone .
it was moved to its present location in front of the town church in 1905 .
about 9 businesses involved in this sector .
of these , 4,308 or about 53.5 % of the people worked outside aarau while 17,419 people changed into the municipality for work .
there were 21,161 jobs each week at least 6 hours per week williamsburg in the municipality .
the largest employer in aarau is the cantonal government .
one of the two head offices of the " aargauer zeitung " , switzerland 's fifth largest newspaper , is in aarau .
more than half of the workers in aarau live in the city 's suburbs , or farther away in the surrounding area .
the small scale of aarau makes it to continually expand the borders of its growth .
the city is in the middle of the " golden triangle " between zu rich , bern , and basel .
the idea of merging aarau with its neighboring suburbs has been recently discussed in the hope of arresting the slowly going losses .
every saturday morning there is a vegetable market in the " graben " at the edge of the old city .
in the last week of september the magnified market of aarauer tradesmenhausen takes place there .
the " rueblimart " is held in the same place on the first wednesday in november .
the aarau fair is held in the ice skating rink during the spring .
aarau is a terminus of the s-bahn zurich on the line s3 .
there are three reasons for this population loss : firstly , since the completion of telli wouldn , the city has not had any more considerable land developments .
thirdly , population growth was absorbed by neighboring municipalities in the regional urban area , and numerous citizens of aarau moved into the countryside .
this trend might have stopped since the turn of the 21st century .
over the last 10 years the population has grown at a rate of 1 % .
1,296 children or 8.1 % of the population are between 0 and 9 years old and 1,334 teenagers or 8.4 % are between 10 and 19 .
there are 942 people who are between 80 and 89 , and there are 90 % who are between 90 and 89 .
in aarau about 74.2 % of the population whom are between age 25 – 64 dubai have completed either non-mandatory upper secondary education nor additional higher education education education equivalent to a university or university .
there are 280 students attending primary school .
aarau is home to a number of sites that are listed as swiss heritage sites of national significance .
the cantonal library , which has many pieces important to the nation 's history , and art gallery , the old cantonal school , the legislature , the cantonal administration building , and the archives .
the remaining four buildings on the list are : the former rickenbach factory , the crematorium , the " haus zum erker " at rathausgasse 10 and the " restaurant zunftstube " at pelzgasse .
there is also the trade museum which has stained glass windows from muri convent and paintings .
of the rest of the population , there are 51 individualsisches or about 0.33 % of the populationzbeks who belong to the christian catholic i . e .
in place of a town meeting , a town assembly ¥ of 50 members is elected by the citizens .
there are optional and obligatory referendums .
the term of office is four years .
it carries out the resolutions of the assembly , and those requested by the canton and national level governments .
the coat of arms of the city is " argent an eagle displayed sable beaked langued and membered gules and a chief of the last " .
