kwanzaa is a celebration in the united states and in other nations of the african diaspora in the americas .
it is observed from december 26 to january 1 .
kwanzaa has seven core principles .
it was created by maulana karenga .
in 1966 , american black power activist and secular humanist maulana karenga created kwanzaa .
the name kwanzaa comes from the swahili phrase " matunda ya kwanza " , meaning " first fruits of the harvest " .
a more conventional translation would simply be " first fruits " .
swahili , an east african language , was a symbol of pan-africanism .
first fruits festivals exist in southern africa , celebrated in december / january with the southern solstice .
it was decided to spell the holiday 's name with an additional " a " so that it would have a symbolic seven letters .
kwanzaa is a celebration of the black nationalist movement of the 1960s .
karenga created it to help african americans reconnect with their african cultural and historical heritage .
karenga , a major figure in the black power movement of the 1960s and 1970s , the creation of such holidays also underscored an essential premise " you must have a cultural revolution before the violent revolution .
the cultural revolution gives identity , purpose and direction .
karenga said it was an alternative to christmas .
he believed that jesus was psychotic and christianity was a " white " religion that black people should shun .
as kwanzaa gained mainstream believers , karenga altered his position so practicing christians would not be alienated , then stating in the 1997 " kwanzaa : a celebration of family , community , and culture " , " kwanzaa was not created to give people an alternative to their own religion or religious holiday . "
many african americans who celebrate kwanzaa do so in addition to observing christmas .
karenga said " is a communitarian african philosophy , " .
they were formed in 1965 .
these seven principles comprise " kawaida " , a swahili word meaning " common " .
kwanzaa celebratory symbols include a maturation mkekalogram on which other symbols are placed : a " kinara " candle holderometer , " mishumaa saba " foley , " cornhumaa saba "graphizer crops ; " mazao " ; " mahindi " ; " mazao " ; " mahindi " ; " mazao " ; ; " " " " " " " ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ;
supplemental representations include a nguzo saba poster , the black , red , and green " bendera " opener , and african books and artworks – all to represent values and reflective concepts of african culture and contribution to community building and reinforcement .
ears of corn represent the children celebrating and corn may be part of the holiday meal .
fresh fruits that represent african idealism are also used .
it is customary to include children in kwanzaa ceremonies and to give respect and gratitude to ancestors .
libations are shared , generally with a common chalice , " kikombe cha umoja " , passed around to all people .
non-african americans also celebrate kwanzaa .
the holiday greeting is " joyous kwanzaa " .
a kwanzaa ceremony may include drumming and musical selections , libations , a reading of the african oath and the principles of blackness , reflection on the pan-african colors , a discussion of the african principle of the day or a chapter in african history , a candle-lighting ritual , and , finally , a feast karamultamutious .
the greeting for each day of kwanzaa is " habari gani ? "
which is swahili for " what 's the news ? "
at first , observers of kwanzaa avoided the mixing of the holiday or its symbols , values , and practice with other holidays .
today , many african american families celebrate kwanzaa along with christmas and new year 's .
they share space in kwanzaa-celebrating households .
for people who celebrate both holidays , kwanzaa is an opportunity to incorporate elements of their ethnic heritage into holiday observances and celebrations of christmas .
cultural exhibitions include the spirit of kwanzaa , an annual celebration held at the john f . kennedy center for the performing arts .
the national retail federation has sponsored a marketing survey on winter holidays since 2004 .
in a 2006 speech , maulana karenga said that 28 million people celebrate kwanzaa .
he has always said it is celebrated all over the world .
the number of people in the group is 12 million .
the african american cultural center has said that 30 million african americans lived in the united states in 2009 .
the university of minnesota professor keith mayes , the author of " kwanzaa : black power and the making of the african-american holiday tradition , " the popularity within the u . s . has " leveled off " as the black power movement there has declined , and as of 2009 between 500 and one million americans celebrated kwanzaa , or between 5,000 and a thousand and two million americans celebrated african americans .
mayes added that white institutions now celebrate it .
the holiday became increasingly commercialized , with the first hallmark card being sold in 1992 .
the holiday also saw a greater public recognition as the first kwanzaa stamp , designed by synthia saint james , was issued by the united states post office in 1997 , and in the same year bill clinton gave the first presidential declaration marking the holiday .
it is celebrated in canada and the united states .
according to the language portal of canada , this fairly new tradition has also gained in popularity in france , great britain , jamaica and brazil .
brazilian celebrations have been held in several cities .
stjepan mestrovic , a sociology professor at the texas a & m university , sees kwanzaa as an example of postmodernism .
according to mestrovic , post-modernists in modern society may view " real " traditions as racist , sexist or otherwise oppressive , but since living in a world where nothing is true is too terrifying to most people , " nice " and " synthetic " traditions like kwanzaa have been created to cope with the nihilistic society .
maya angelou narrated a documentary film about kwanzaa , " the black candle " , written and directed by m . k . asante , jr . and featuring chuck d , graduate of goldsmiths university of london .
