half-life savings symbol t is the time required for a quantity to reduce to half of its initial value .
the term is often used in nuclear physics to describe how quickly unstable atoms undergo , or how long stable atoms survive , radioactive decay .
the term is also used to describe any type of exponential or non-exponential decay .
for example , the medical sciences refer to the biological half-life of drugs and other chemicals in the human body .
half-life is doubling time .
the original term , half-life period , dates from rutherford 's discovery of the principle in 1907 , was shortened to " half-life " in the early 1950s .
rutherford used the principle of a radioactive element 's half-life to studies of age determination of rocks by measuring the decay period of radium to lead-206 .
half-life is constant over the lifetime of an exponentially decaying quantity .
the table shows that the number of half-lives elapsed is reduced .
half-life is the decay of radioactive atoms .
in that case , it does not use the definition that states " half-life is the time required for exactly half of the entities to decay " .
for example , if there is just one radioactive atom , and its half-life is one second , there will " not " half of an atom left after one second .
half-life is defined in terms of probability : " half-life is the time required for exactly half of the entities to decay " on average " .
in other words , the probability of a radioactive atom decaying within its half-life is 50 % .
for example , the image on the right is a simulation of many identical atoms undergoing radioactive decay .
note that after one half-life there are not exactly one-half of the atoms remaining , only " approximately " , because of the random variation in the process .
nevertheless , when there are many identical atoms decayingttered right boxes ¥ , the law of large numbers suggests that it is a " very good approximation " to say that half of the atoms remain after one half-life .
there are many different simple exercises that show probabilistic decay .
an exponential decay can be described by any of the following three equivalent formulas : where
the three parameters " t " , τ , and λ are all directly related in the following way : where ln aarhus 2 [mask] is the natural logarithm of 2 vols .
some quantities decay by two exponential-decay processes at the same time .
for three or more processes , the analogous formula is : for a proof of these formulas , see exponential decay by two or more processes .
there is a half-life describing any exponential-decay process .
the term " half-life " is almost exclusively used for decay processes that are exponentially exponentially equivalent such as radioactive decay or the other examples above percivally .
in a decay process that is not even close to exponential , the half-life will change dramatically while the decay is happening .
in this situation it is generally uncommon to talk about half-life in the first place , but sometimes people will describe the decay in terms of its " first half-life " , " second half-life " , etc . , where the first half-life is defined as the time required for decay from the initial value to 50 % , and so on 25 % , the second half-life is 25 % , so on 25 % , and so on 25 % .
a half-life or half-life is the time it takes for a substance whose nuclide is to lose one-half of its pharmacologic , physiologic , or radiological activity .
in a medical context , half-life may also describe the amount of substance in blood plasma to reach one-half of its steady-state value .
the relationship between the biological and plasma half-lives of a substance can be complex .
the elimination of a substance from a living organism usually follows more complex chemical kinetics .
for example , the biological half-life of a human being is about 9 to 10 days .
the half-life of caesium in human beings is between one and four months .
the concept of a half-life has also been used for pesticides in plants .
