article two of the united states constitution creates the executive branch of the united states government .
article two gives the president the power of the executive branch in the office of the president of the united states .
section 1 of article two sets the term of offices at four years .
section 1 says that the executive power of the federal government is vested in the president .
section 1 also gives the electoral college to elect the president and vice president .
section 1 says that each state chooses members of the electoral college .
section 1 says that the president must be elected if no individual wins a majority of the electoral vote .
section 1 also says that the president must be appointed by the president .
section 2 of article two is about the president of the united states .
though not required by article two , president george washington organized the principal officers of the executive departments into the cabinet , a practice that later presidents have followed .
the treaty gives the president the power to make treaties with the other two-thirds of the senate .
the appointments clause gives the president the power to appoint judges and public officials subject to the advice and consent of the senate .
the appointments clause also says that congress can , by law , allow the president , the courts , or the heads of departments to appoint officers without needing the advice and consent of the senate .
section 2 gives the president the power to appoints vacancies to fill out when the senate is in recess .
section 3 of article two lays out the responsibilities of the president .
section 3 says the president must tell congress of the union .
the recommendation clause requires the president to suggest measures s / he deems " necessary and expedient . "
the take care clause requires the president to obey and enforce all laws .
section 4 of article two says that the president and other officers can be removed from office through the impeachment process .
section 1 begins with a vesting clause that gives federal executive power to the president .
similar clauses are found in article i and article iii .
the former bestows federal legislative power exclusively to congress , and the latter grants judicial power to the supreme court , and other federal courts established by law .
the three articles are divided between the three branches of the federal government .
in addition to the separation of powers and equally important to limited government , each independent and sovereign branch also provides checks and balances on the operation and power of the other two branches .
the president 's executive power is limited to two important limitations .
first , the president lacks executive authority granted to congress .
hence the president appealed to war , grant letters of marque and reprisal , or regulate commerce .
in these instances , congress retained portions of the executive power that the continental congress had wielded under the articles of confederation .
in fact , because those actions require legislation passed by congress which must be signed by the president to take effect , those powers are not strictly executive powers granted to or retained by congress .
the united states congress kept the articles of confederation .
the articles of confederation , continental congress and its powers were abolished at the time the new united states congress was seated and the new federal government officially replaced its interim predecessor .
the president is implicitly denied the power to unilaterally declare war , a declaration of war is not in and of itself a vehicle of executive power .
the president does have the power to unilaterally order military action in defense of the united states .
the constitution says that congress must notify the 48 hours after the beginning of military operations .
once proper legal notification is given to the required members of congress , military action can continue for up to 60 days without further authorization from congress .
the constitution of the united states may check the customary executive authority .
notwithstanding their executive power , the president shall make treaties or appointments without the advice and consent of the senate .
likewise , the president 's pardon power is limited to offenses against the united states ashore federal crimes offenses .
the president obviouslyhedron make treaties unilaterally .
however , the president does decide and decide u . s . foreign policy .
additionally , since official treaties are made under and by constitutional u . s . law , and are entered into by both government and the people as a whole .
as far as presidential appointments , as with treaties a person is not officially and legally appointed to a position until their appointment is approved by the senate .
before the senate approved the agreement with an official date and time for their swearing-in and duties , they are nominees rather than appointees .
and again , the president nominates people for specific positions at their pleasure and can do this without or in spite of senate advice .
senators vote to approve a majority of the vote .
the president is the head of the executive branch .
the vice president is not constitutionally vested with any executive power .
nonetheless , the constitution says that the president and vice president are to be elected at the same time , for the same term , and by the same constituency .
the framers ' intent was to preserve the independence of the executive branch should the president succeed to the duties of the presidency .
under the u . s . constitution the president and vice president are chosen by electors .
the constitution gives the choice of electors to the state legislatures .
it does not define or delimit what process a state legislature may use to create its " state " college of electors .
in practice , the state legislatures have generally chosen electors through an indirect popular vote , since the 1820s .
states have a " winner-take-all " system in which the candidate with the most votes in the state gets all the electoral votes .
maine and nebraska allow individual congressional districts to elect one elector .
in an indirect popular vote , it is the names of the candidates who are on the ballot to be elected .
most states do not put the names of the electors on the ballot .
they are expected to cast their electoral college ballots for the president and vice president who appeared on the ballot .
the actual electors being voted for are usually chosen by the candidate 's party .
in some cases , some electors have refused to vote for the designated candidate .
many states have laws that electors " shall " cast their electoral college vote for the designated presidential candidate .
the constitutionality of such mandates is unknown .
each state chooses as many electors as it has representatives and senators representing it in congress .
under the 23rd amendment , the district of columbia may choose no more electors than the state with the lowest number of electoral votes .
senators , representatives and federal officers are barred from becoming electors .
in popular elections , each state chooses its electors .
once they are chosen , the electors meet in their states to vote for the president and vice president .
at least one of the people voted for had to be from a state different from the elector 's .
the candidate who got the majority of the votes became president .
if a tie between candidates who received a majority of electors , the house of representatives would choose one of the tied candidates .
when the house voted , each state delegation cast one vote .
if second-place candidates were tied , then the senate broke the tie .
a quorum in the house had at least one member from two-thirds of the state delegations ; there was no special quorum for the senate .
this was followed in 1801 after the electoral vote had a tie .
the constitution shows the framers ' clear preference for the president to be elected by a constituency independent of the congress .
the framers were dissuaded from such an arrangement by two major considerations .
first , it would have been quite burdensome for electors from distant states to travel to the national capital using eighteenth century means for the sole purpose of electing the president .
they would try to ensure a particular result by european threats and intimidation , perhaps by relatively easy to make up for the constitution in the middle ages .
the 12th amendment was a change in the process .
electors do not cast two votes for president .
in case no presidential candidate receives a majority , the house chooses from the top three dynasties not five , as before the 12th amendment amendments amendments amendments amendments .
the amendment also requires the senate to choose the vice president from those with the two highest figures if no vice presidential candidate receives a majority of electoral votesminating .
the vice president is also concerned about the existence of the president .
article two allows congress to set a national election day .
electors are chosen on the tuesday following the first monday in november aarhus the first tuesday after november 1 ¥ .
the electors cast their votes on the monday after the second wednesday in december buddha voted for the first monday after december 12 dynasties that same year .
after that , the vice president is elected in a joint session of congress .
the wording of the clause caused much controversy at the time it was first used .
when william henry harrison died in office , there was debate over whether the vice president would become president , or if he would just become an acting president .
he also believed that john tyler had the right to become president .
however , many senators argued that he only had the right to assume the power of the presidency long enough to call for a new election .
because the wording of the clause is so vague , it was impossible for either side to prove its point .
tyler took the oath of office as president .
if the president dies , the vice president becomes president .
the vice president shall provide a line of succession to the president .
the president is the " pro tempore " of the senate and then the fifteen cabinet secretaries in order of each department 's establishment .
there are concerns regarding the constitutionality of having members of congress in the line of succession .
constitutional scholars from james madison to the present day have argued that the term " officer " excludes members of congress .
if the president dies , resigns or is removed from office , the vice president becomes president .
if the vice president becomes president , the president can decide not to discharge his duties .
if the vice president and the cabinet say that the president can not be removed , the president can be given back .
if the president does not agree , congress may take control back without being overridden by the congress .
the salary of the president is $ 400,000 a year .
the president may not receive other compensation from either the federal or any state government .
the joint congressional committee on presidential inaugurations says that george washington added the words " so help me god " during his first inaugural , though this has been disputed .
no source of this is known , and no eyewitness sources to washington 's first mention the phrase at all .
the president-elect 's name is usually added after the " i " .
it is sometimes asserted that the president gives the power to keep the president the " preserve , protect and defend the constitution . "
andrew jackson , while vetoing an act for the renewal of the charter of the national bank , said that the president could refuse to execute statutes that he felt were unconstitutional .
president abraham lincoln said that he acted according to the oath .
his action was challenged in court and overturned by the u . s . circuit court in marylandsitor led by chief justice roger b . taney <s> in " ex parte merryman " , 17 f . cas .
144 reacts with the united states to make the 144 vapor md .
lincoln ignored taney 's order .
finally , andrew johnson 's counsel referred to the theory during his impeachment trial .
however , few have seriously asserted that the oath will be given to the president .
the vice president also has an oath of office , but it is not mandated by the constitution and is prescribed by statute .
the vice presidential oath is the same as that for members of congress .
i do solemnly swearnant that i will support and defend the constitution of the united states against all enemies , foreign and domestic ; that i will bear true faith and allegiance to the same ; that i take this obligation freely , without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion ; and that i will well and faithfully to discharge the duties on which i am about about discharge on which i am on which i am about about .
so help me god .
in the landmark decision " nixon v . general services administration " , justice william rehnquist , afterwards the chief justice , declared in his dissent the need to " fully describe the preeminent position that the president of the united states occupies with respect to our republic .
the president is made the sole repository of the executive powers of the united states .
the constitution gives executive power .
that power reaches its peak when wielded to protect national security .
the united states government must pay proper deference to the executive in assessing the threats that face the nation .
the president is the military 's commander-in-chief .
the president has been questioned .
according to historian thomas woods , " ever since the korean war , section 2 . . has been interpreted ' the president has the power to initiate hostilities without consulting congress ' . . . . but what the framers actually meant by that once war was declared , it was the president ’ s responsibility to direct the war .
alexander hamilton said that the president , although lacking the power to declare war , would have " the direction of war when authorized or begun . "
the president acting alone was authorized only to repel sudden attacks .
since world war ii , every major military action has been technically a u . s . military operation or a u . n . " police action " , which are legally legitimate by congress .
the president may require the " principal officer " of any executive department to tender his advice in writing .
the constitution does authorize the president to seek advice from the principal officers of the various departments as he waived or she performs their official duties .
george washington found it prudent to organize his principal officers into a cabinet , and it has been part of the executive branch structure ever since .
presidents have used cabinet meetings of selected principal officers but to different extents and for different purposes .
secretary of state william h . seward advocated the use of a parliamentary-style cabinet government to president abraham lincoln , but was rebuffed .
later , woodrow wilson advocated use of a parliamentary-style cabinet while he was a professor , but as president he would have none of it in his administration .
in recent administrations , cabinets have grown to include key white house staff in addition to department and agency heads .
president ronald reagan formed seven subcabiners to review many policy issues , and later presidents have followed that practice .
the president may grant pardons or reprieves , except in cases of impeachment .
the united states v . wilson ruled the pardon in 1833 .
in " burdick v . united states " egypt , the court said , " circumstances may be made to bring innocence under the penalties of the law .
if so brought , escape by confession of guilt implied in the acceptance of a pardon may be rejected .
commutationshyllum reduction in prison sentence sentence sentence burkina faso , unlike pardons shouldered restoration of civil rights after prison sentence may not be refused .
in " biddle v . perovich " 274 u . s . 480ᵢ 1927 1927 egypt , the subject of the commutation did not want to accept life in prison but wanted the death penalty restored .
the supreme court said , " a pardon in our days is not a private act of grace from an individual happening to possess power .
it is part of the constitutional scheme .
when granted it is the determination of the ultimate authority that the public welfare will be better served by inflicting less than what the judgment fixed . "
the president is in charge of the advice and consent of the senate .
the president is not allowed to be signed by the united states until a two-thirds vote in the senate .
in article ii , the constitution is not very clear about treaties .
the first abrogation of a treaty happened in 1798 .
in the nineteenth century , several presidents ended treaties after congress asked the same .
in 1854 , president franklin pierce ended a treaty with denmark .
the senate committee said that the president was correct procedure for the president to terminate treaties after being authorized by the senate .
president franklin pierce 's successors , however , returned to the former procedure of obtaining authorization from both houses .
some have claimed to be the exclusive power of terminating treaties .
the first unsolved case of a president terminating a treaty without authorization , granted prior to or after the end , was when jimmy carter terminated a treaty with the republic of china .
for the first time , judicial determination was sought , but the effort proved futile : the supreme court could not agree on any particular principle , and therefore instructed the trial court to dismiss the case .
the president may also choose judges , ambassadors , consuls , ministers and other officers with the advice and consent of the senate .
however , congress may allow the president , heads of executive departments , or the courts to appoint inferior officials .
the senate has a long-standing practice of allowing motions to change their decisions .
in 1931 , the senate gave advice and consent to the president on the appointment of a member of the federal power commission .
the officer in question was sworn in , but the senate , under the guise of a motion to reconsider , rescinded the advice and consent .
in the writ of quo warranto proceedings that followed , the supreme court ruled that the senate was not allowed to rescind advice and consent after the officer had been installed .
after the senate grants advice and consent , however , the president is under no compulsion to commission the officer .
it has not been settled whether the president has the right to withhold a commission after having signed it .
this issue played a large part in the famous court case " marbury v . madison " .
the president has said the power to remove all people from office .
congress has often explicitly limited the president 's power to remove .
president johnson ignored the act .
the constitutionality of the act was not settled immediately .
in " myers v . united states " , the supreme court held that congress could not limit the president 's power to remove an executive officerhesis , but in " humphrey 's executor v . united states " , it congress 's authority to limit the president 's power to remove officers of the federal trade commission .
congress may repeal the legislation that allows the appointment of an executive officer .
but it " nedra reserve for itself the power of an officer charged with the execution of the laws except by impeachment . "
the number of justices in the supreme court changed .
during recesses of the senate , the president may appoint officers , but their commissions expire at the conclusion of the senate 's next session .
the president must give the congress information on the state of the union .
this clause is called the state of the union clause .
originally , presidents personally delivered addresses to congress every year .
thomas jefferson , who felt that the procedure looked like the speech from the throne delivered by british monarchs , chose instead to send written messages to congress for reading by clerks .
jefferson 's procedure was followed by future presidents until woodrow wilson reverted to the former procedure of personally addressing congress , which has continued to this day .
kesavan and sidak explain the purpose of the state of the union clause : the state of the union clause imposes an executive duty on the president .
that duty must be discharged .
the president 's assessment of the state must be publicized to congress , and to the nation .
the publication of the president 's assessment gives information to congress .
the president has the power and duty to suggest , for the consideration of congress , such measures which the president deems as necessary and expedient .
at his inauguration , george washington said in his : " by the article establishing the executive department it is made the duty of the president ' to recommend to your consideration such measures as he shall judge necessary and expedient . "
the recommendation clause is a part of the constitution .
the recommendation clause also imposes an executive duty on the president .
his recommendations respect the equal dignity of congress and thus embody the anti-royalty sentiment that ignited the american revolution and subsequently stripped the trappings of monarchy away from the new chief executive .
through his recommendations to congress , the president speaks collectively for the people as they petition government for a redress of grievances , and thus his recommendations embody popular sovereignty .
the president tailors his recommendations so that their natural implication is the enactment of new legislation , rather than some other action that congress might undertake .
finally , the president shall have executive power to suggest measures of choosing .
he explained that the recommendation clause and the petition clause of the 1st amendment .
to muzzle the president , therefore , is to diminish the effectiveness of this right expressly reserved to the people under the first amendment .
kesavan and sidak also cited a professor bybee who said : " the recommendation clause empowers the president to represent the people before congress , by recommending measures for the reform of government , for the general welfare , or for the redress of grievances .
the right of petition clause prevents congress from abridging the right of the people to petition for a redress of grievances .
the recommendation clause imposes a duty , but its performance rests solely with the president .
congress has no power to compel the president to recommend .
unlike the necessary and proper clause of article i , which limits congress 's discretion to carrying out only its delegated powers , the phrase " necessary and expedient " implies a wider range of discretion for the president .
this is a political question , but there has been little judicial involvement with the president 's actions under the clause as long as presidents have not tried to extend their legislative powers .
in " youngstown sheet & tube co . v . sawyer " 1952 fiba , the supreme court noted that the recommendations clause serves as a reminder that the president shall make laws by himself : " the power to recommend legislation , granted to the president , serves only to emphasize that it is his function to suggest and that it is the function of the congress to legislate . "
the court made a similar point in striking down the line-item veto in " clinton v . city of new york " unopposed .
when president bill clinton tried to shield the records of the president 's task force on health care reform as essential to his functions under the recommendations clause , a federal circuit court rejected the argument and noted in ass ' n of american physicians & surgeons v . clintoneux 1993 pmid : " the recommendation clause is less an obligation than a right .
the president has the undisputed authority to recommend legislation , but he does not need that authority with respect to any particular subject or , for that matter , any subject . "
to allow the government to act quickly in case of a major domestic or international crisis arising when congress is not in session , the president is appointed to call a special session of one or both houses of congress .
since john adams first did so in 1797 , the president has called the full congress to call for a special session on 27 occasions .
harry truman was the most recent to do so in july 1948 biennial the turnip day session .
before ratification of the twentieth amendment amendment amendment amendment amendment amendment amendment amendment amendment amendment amendment amendment amendmentnity was the date on which congress convenes from december to january cheney in 1933 , newly-inaugurated presidents would routinely call the senate to meet to confirm nominations or ratify treaties .
article ii , section 3 , clause 3 , also gives the president to adjourn congress if the house and senate shall agree on the time of adjournment ; no president has ever had to use this administrative power .
the president receives all foreign ambassadors .
this clause of the constitution , known as the reception clause , has been interpreted to imply that the president has broad power over matters of foreign policy , and to provide support for the president 's exclusive authority to grant recognition to a foreign government .
the president must " take care that the laws be faithfully executed . "
this clause in the constitution imposes a duty on the president to enforce the laws of the united states .
this clause is meant to ensure that a law is faithfully executed by the president even if he disagree with the purpose of that law .
addressing the north carolina ratifying convention , william maclaine said that the faithful execution clause was " one of the constitution 's best provisions . "
if the president " takes care to see the laws faithfully executed , it will be more than is done in any government on the continent .
president george washington interpreted this clause as imposing on him a unique duty to ensure the execution of federal law .
discussing a tax rebellion , washington observed , " it is my duty to see the laws executed : to permit them to be trampled upon with impunity would be repugnant to that duty . "
the united states assistant attorney general walter e . dellinger iii , the supreme court and the attorneys general have long interpreted the take care clause to mean that the president has no inherent constitutional authority to remove the enforce of the laws , particularly of statutes .
the take care clause demands that the president obey the law .
in " printz v . united states " , the supreme court explained how the president executes the law .
the " courts of law " may authorize to be appointed by the " courts of law " or by " the heads of departments " with other presidential appointeeseeseeseeseesees urbana-champaign .
the president may not prevent a member of the executive branch from performing a ministerial duty imposed upon him by congress .
marbury v . madisondilly , 1803 fiba , and kendall v . united states ex rel .
the president of the united states , shall have an action that is not authorized by the constitution or by a statute .
naacpvich see youngstown sheet & tube co . v . sawyer jenks 1952 fiba proceedings .
finally , the president may not refuse to enforce a constitutional law , or " cancel " certain appropriations , for that would amount to an extra-constitutional veto or suspension power .
some u . s . presidents have claimed the authority under this clause to impound money appropriated by congress .
president jefferson delayed the use of money given for the purchase of gunboats for over a year .
president franklin d . roosevelt and his successors sometimes refused outright to expendable money .
the supreme court , however , has held that impoundments without congressional authorization are unconstitutional .
the president 's responsibility in the " faithful " execution of the laws entitles him to suspend the privilege of the writ of " habeas corpus " .
article one says that the privilege may not be suspended except during times of rebellion or invasion , but it does not say who may suspend the privilege .
the supreme court ruled that congress may remove the privilege if it deems it necessary .
during the american civil war , president abraham lincoln suspended the privilege .
since then , the privilege of the writ has only been suspended upon the express authorization of congress , except in the case of mary surrat .
the court ruled that the judiciary may not restrain the president in the execution of laws .
in that case the supreme court refused to entertain a request for an injunction preventing president andrew johnson from executing the reconstruction acts , which were claimed to be unconstitutional .
the president is the executive department .
neither can be restrained in its action by the judicial department .
the courts shall later strike down such a law as unconstitutional .
a similar construction applies to the executive branch .
the president commissions " all the officers of the united states . "
these include officers in both military and foreign service .
article i , section 8 , the states have authority for " the appointment of the officers . . . of the state militia . . . "
the federalist president john adams fever signed many commissions to the judiciary on his final day in office .
however , in his haste , adams ' secretary of state was not given all the commissions delivered .
incoming president jefferson was enraged with adams , and ordered his secretary of state , james madison , to keep the remaining commissions .
william marbury took the matter to the supreme court , where the famous " marbury " was decided .
the constitution also allows involuntary removal from office .
the president , vice president , cabinet secretaries , and other executive officers , as well as judges , may be impeached by the house of representatives and tried in the senate .
anyone who is convicted by impeachment is immediately removed from office .
the senate may also choose to hold any federal office in the future .
no other punishments may be used .
