amethyst is a mineral gemstone that is found in quartz .
the name comes from the greek αμεθυστος " amethystos " from " a-" , " not " and μεθυσω " methysko " , " intoxicate " , a reference to the belief that the stone was protected from its owner .
the ancient greeks wore amethyst and carved drinking vessels from it .
amethyst is a stone often used in jewelry .
amethyst is a purple variety of quartz quartz atoms .
the hardness of the mineral is the same as quartz , so making it suitable for use in jewelry .
amethyst occurs in primary colours from a light pinkish violet to a deep purple .
amethyst may exhibit one or both secondary hues , red and blue .
the best amethyst is found in siberia , sri lanka , brazil and the far east .
the ideal grade is called " deep siberian " .
‘ rose de france ’ is defined by its markedly light shade of the purple , reminiscent of a lavender / lilac shade .
these pale colors , were once considered undesirable but have recently become popular due to intensive marketing .
green quartz is sometimes incorrectly called green amethyst , which is a misnomer and not a appropriate name for the material , the proper terminology being prasiolite .
other names for green quartz are vermarine or lime citrine .
of very variable intensity , the color of amethyst is often laid out in stripes parallel to the final faces of the crystal .
one aspect in the art of lapidary involves correctly cutting the stone to place the color in a way that makes the tone of the finished gem homogeneous .
often , the fact that sometimes only a thin surface layer of violet color is present in the stone .
the color of amethyst has been shown to result from substitution by irradiation of trivalent iron oxide oxide oxide oxide into the structure .
when heated , it turns yellow-orange , yellow-brown , or dark brownish .
amethyst is a result of ametrine .
amethyst can fade if overexposed to light sources .
amethyst was used as a gemstone by the ancient egyptians .
the greeks believed that amethyst gems could prevent intoxication , while medieval european soldiers wore amethyst amulets as protection in battle .
beads of amethyst were found in anglo-saxon graves in england .
anglican bishops wear an episcopal ring .
a large geode , or " amethyst-grotto " , from near santa cruz in southern brazil was presented at a exhibition in janeiro , germany .
in the 19th century , manganese was used to color amethyste .
however , it can be changed and even discharged by heat .
sulfur has been found in the mineral .
synthetic wolverine laboratory-grownometric amethyst is produced by a synthesis method called hydrothermal growth , which grows the crystals inside a high-pressure autoclave .
synthetic amethyst is made to imitate the best amethyst .
its chemical and physical properties are the same to that of natural amethyst .
there is one test based on " brazil law twinning " .
it is possible to make twinned amethyst , but this type is not available in large quantities in the market .
this is where a lot of synthetic quartz is used .
it is made by gamma ray , x-ray or electron beam irradiation of clear quartzzquez rock crystalcek .
when exposure to heat , the irradiation effects can be partially cancelled .
the greek word " amethystos " may be translated as " not drunken " , from greek " a-" , " not " + " methustos " , " intoxicated " .
amethyst was considered to be a strong antidote against drunkenness , which is why wine goblets were often carved from it .
in his poem " l ' amethyste , ou les amours de bacchus et d ' amethyste " , the french poet remy belleautiques , into a myth named bacchus , the god of affections , who refused to become a myth .
amethyste prayed to the gods to remain chaste .
he poured wine over the stone as an offering , dyeing the crystals purple .
he swore to slay the next mortal who crossed his path , creating fierce tigers to carry out his wrath .
she was on her way to pay tribute to artemis .
her life was spared by artemis , who transformed the maiden into a statue of quartz to protect her from the brutal claws .
dionysus weep tears of wine in remorse for his action at the sight of the beautiful statue .
the god 's tears then stained the quartz purple .
this myth and its variations are not found in classical sources .
the titan rhea does present dionysus with an amethyst stone to keep the wine-drinker 's sanity in historical text .
tibetans consider amethyst sacred to the buddha and make prayer beads from it .
amethyst is the birthstone of february .
it was used to decorate english regalia .
in the old world , amethyst was considered one of the cardinal gems .
amethyst is produced in abundance from the state of minas gerais in brazil .
many of the hollow agates of southwestern brazil and uruguay contain a crop of amethyst crystals in the interior .
artigas , uruguay and neighboring brazilian state rio grande do sul are large world producers .
it is also found in south korea .
the largest opencast amethyst vein in the world is in maissau , lower austria .
much fine amethyst comes from russia , especially near mursinka in the ekaterinburg district , where it occurs in drusy cavities in granitic rocks .
many localities in south india yield amethyst .
one of the largest global amethyst producers is in southern africa with an annual production of about 1000 tons .
amethyst occurs at many places in the united states .
among these may be mentioned : the mazatzal mountain region in gila and maricopa counties , arizona ; red feather lakes , near ft collins , colorado ; amethyst mountain , texas ; yellowstone national park ; delaware county , pennsylvania ; deer hill and stow , maine and in the lake superior region of michigan .
amethyst is common in the canadian provinces of ontario and nova scotia .
the largest amethyst mine in north america is in thunder bay , ontario .
until the 18th century , amethyst was included in the cardinal , or most valuable gemstones along with diamond , sapphire , ruby , and emeraldlity .
however , since the discovery of lots of deposits in locations such as brazil , it has lost most of its value .
collectors look for depth of color , possibly with red flashes if cut conventionally .
as amethyst is readily available in large structures the value of the gem is not primarily defined by carat weight .
the biggest factor in the value of amethyst is the color displayed .
the highest grade amethystystystystylus called " deep russian " independently is exceptionally rare and therefore , when one is found , its value is dependent on the demand of collectors .
it is , however , orders of magnitude lower than the highest grade sapphires or rubies .
