amethyst is a mineral gemstone that is found in quartz .
the hardness of the mineral is the same as quartz , so making it suitable for use in jewelry .
amethyst may exhibit one or both secondary hues , red and blue .
the best amethyst is found in siberia , sri lanka , brazil and the far east .
‘ rose de france ’ is defined by its markedly light shade of the purple , reminiscent of a lavender / lilac shade .
green quartz is sometimes incorrectly called green amethyst , which is a misnomer and not a appropriate name for the material , the proper terminology being prasiolite .
of very variable intensity , the color of amethyst is often laid out in stripes parallel to the final faces of the crystal .
one aspect in the art of lapidary involves correctly cutting the stone to place the color in a way that makes the tone of the finished gem homogeneous .
often , the fact that sometimes only a thin surface layer of violet color is present in the stone .
the color of amethyst has been shown to result from substitution by irradiation of trivalent iron oxide oxide oxide oxide into the structure .
amethyst is a result of ametrine .
a large geode , or " amethyst-grotto " , from near santa cruz in southern brazil was presented at a exhibition in janeiro , germany .
in the 19th century , manganese was used to color amethyste .
its chemical and physical properties are the same to that of natural amethyst .
it is possible to make twinned amethyst , but this type is not available in large quantities in the market .
this is where a lot of synthetic quartz is used .
when exposure to heat , the irradiation effects can be partially cancelled .
amethyst was considered to be a strong antidote against drunkenness , which is why wine goblets were often carved from it .
in his poem " l ' amethyste , ou les amours de bacchus et d ' amethyste " , the french poet remy belleautiques , into a myth named bacchus , the god of affections , who refused to become a myth .
he poured wine over the stone as an offering , dyeing the crystals purple .
he swore to slay the next mortal who crossed his path , creating fierce tigers to carry out his wrath .
her life was spared by artemis , who transformed the maiden into a statue of quartz to protect her from the brutal claws .
dionysus weep tears of wine in remorse for his action at the sight of the beautiful statue .
the god 's tears then stained the quartz purple .
the titan rhea does present dionysus with an amethyst stone to keep the wine-drinker 's sanity in historical text .
tibetans consider amethyst sacred to the buddha and make prayer beads from it .
in the old world , amethyst was considered one of the cardinal gems .
amethyst is produced in abundance from the state of minas gerais in brazil .
many of the hollow agates of southwestern brazil and uruguay contain a crop of amethyst crystals in the interior .
the largest opencast amethyst vein in the world is in maissau , lower austria .
amethyst occurs at many places in the united states .
among these may be mentioned : the mazatzal mountain region in gila and maricopa counties , arizona ; red feather lakes , near ft collins , colorado ; amethyst mountain , texas ; yellowstone national park ; delaware county , pennsylvania ; deer hill and stow , maine and in the lake superior region of michigan .
the largest amethyst mine in north america is in thunder bay , ontario .
until the 18th century , amethyst was included in the cardinal , or most valuable gemstones along with diamond , sapphire , ruby , and emeraldlity .
as amethyst is readily available in large structures the value of the gem is not primarily defined by carat weight .
the biggest factor in the value of amethyst is the color displayed .
the highest grade amethystystystystylus called " deep russian " independently is exceptionally rare and therefore , when one is found , its value is dependent on the demand of collectors .