March is the third month of the year and named after Mars in both the Julian and Gregorian calendars.
In the Northern Hemisphere, the meteorological beginning of spring occurs on the first day of March.
The March equinox on the 20 or 21 marks the astronomical beginning of spring in the Northern Hemisphere and the beginning of autumn in the Southern Hemisphere, where September is the seasonal equivalent of the Northern Hemisphere's March.
The name of March comes from "Martius", the first month of the earliest Roman calendar.
His month "Martius" was the beginning of the season for warfare, and the festivals held in his honor during the month were mirrored by others in October, when the season for these activities came to a close.
"Martius" remained the first month of the Roman calendar year perhaps as late as 153 BC, and several religious observances in the first half of the month were originally new year's celebrations.
Even in late antiquity, Roman mosaics picturing the months sometimes still placed March first.
March 1 began the numbered year in Russia until the end of the 15th century.
Great Britain and its colonies continued to use March 25 until 1752, when they finally adopted the Gregorian calendar (the fiscal year in the UK continues to begin on the 6th April, initially identical to 25 March in the former Julian calendar).
Many other cultures and religions still celebrate the beginning of the New Year in March.
In Finnish, the month is called "maaliskuu", which is believed to originate from "maallinen kuu", during March, earth finally becomes visible under the snow (other etymological theories have however been put forward).
Historical names for March include the Saxon "Lentmonat", named after the March equinox and gradual lengthening of days, and the eventual namesake of Lent.
In Slovene, the traditional name is "sušec", meaning the month when the earth becomes dry enough so that it is possible to cultivate it.
"(Please note that all Baha'i, Islamic, and Jewish observances begin at the sundown prior to the date listed, and end at sundown of the date in question unless otherwise noted.)"