aarau nedra , filmfareoise , is a town and the capital of the northern swiss canton of aargau .
the town is the capital of the district of aarau .
it is mainly protestant .
aarau is in the swiss plateau , in the valley of the aare , on the river 's right bank , and at the southern foot of the jura mountains , and is 65 km northeast of bern .
the municipality is in the canton of solothurn in west switzerland .
it is the largest town in aargau .
since 2010 rohr is part of the district of aarau .
the official language of aarau is dialect of the swiss german dialect .
the old city of aarau is on a rocky cliff .
newer districts of the city are to the south and east of the outcrop , as well as higher up the mountain , and in the valley on both sides of the aare .
the municipalities next to it are kuttigen , buchs , unterentfelden , eppenberg-woschnau and erlinsbach .
aarau and the municipalities have merged over the years .
the only exception is unterentfelden whose settlements are divided from aarau by the extensive forests of gonhard and zelgli .
about nine-tenths of the city is south of the aare .
it has an area of 8.9 km2 .
of this area , 6.3 % is used for agricultural purposes , while 34 % is forested .
of the rest of the land , 55.2 % is settledcek buildings or roads fragments .
the lowest point , 365 m , is found at the banks of the aar , and the highest elevation , at 471 m , is the hungerberg on the border with kuttigen .
a few artifacts from the neolithic period were found in aarau .
near the location of the present train station , the ruins of a settlement from the bronze ageylus have been excavated .
the roman road between salodurum momentarily solothurnurnurn clements and vindonissa passed through the area , along the route now covered by the bahnhofstrasse .
in 1976 divers in the aare found part of a seven-meter wide wooden bridge from the late roman times .
aarau was founded around 1240 by the counts of kyburg .
aarau is first mentioned in 1248 as " arowe " .
around 1250 it was called " arowa " .
the first mention of a city was in 1256 .
the town was ruled from the rore tower , which has been incorporated into the modern city hall .
in 1273 the counts of kyburg died out .
she sold the family 's lands to king rudolf i of habsburg .
he gave aarau its city rights in 1283 .
in the 14th century the city was expanded in two stages , and a second defensive wall was constructed .
a deep ditch separated the city from its " suburb " .
in 1415 , the bern invaded switzerland .
aarau surrendered after a short rebellion , and was forced to swear allegiance to the new rulers .
in the 16th century , the rights of the lower classes were abolished .
in march 1528 the citizens of aarau allowed protestantism to be allowed .
a growth in population during the 16th century led to taller buildings and more dense construction methods .
early forms of industry developed at this time .
in 1712 , the peace of aarau was signed into effect .
this granted each canton the right to choose their own religion .
from the early 18th century , the textile industry was in aarau .
german immigration made the city good , in that they introduced the cotton and silk factories .
these highly educated immigrants were also responsible for educational reform and the enlightened , revolutionary spirit that developed in aarau .
on 27 december 1797 , the last tagsatzung of the old swiss confederacy was held in aarau .
two weeks later a french envoy continued to foment the revolutionary opinions of the city .
the city refused to send troops to defend the bernese border .
by march 1798 aarau was occupied by french troops .
in 1798 aarau was made the capital of the helvetic republic .
it is the first capital of switzerland .
parliament met in the city hall .
on 20 september the capital was moved to lucerne .
in 1803 , the canton of aargau , baden and fricktal were merged .
aarau was made the capital of the new canton of aargau .
in 1820 the city wall was torn down , with the exception of the individual towers and gates , and the defensive ditches were filled in .
the wooden bridge was destroyed by floods three times in thirty years .
in 1952 , the bridge was replaced by a concrete bridge .
the city was linked up to the swiss central railroad in 1856 .
the textile industry in aarau broke down in about 1850 because of the protectionist tariff policies of neighboring states .
other industries had developed by that time to replace it .
from 1900 , many electrical enterprises developed .
by the 1960s , more people worked in service industries or for the canton-level government than in manufacturing .
during the 1980s many of the industries in aarau were left completely .
in 1802 the canton school was started .
it developed a good reputation , and was home to nobel prize winners albert einstein , paul karrer , and werner arber , as well as several swiss politicians and authors .
the purchase of a manuscript collection in 1803 laid the foundation for what would become the cantonal library .
more newspapers developed in the city , keeping the revolutionary atmosphere of aarau .
beginning in 1820 , aarau has been a refuge for political refugees .
the urban educational and cultural opportunities of aarau were extended through numerous new institutions .
a theater and concert hall was constructed in 1883 .
the aargau nature museum opened in 1922 .
a former cloth warehouse was changed into a small theatre in 1974 .
the earliest use of the place name was in 1248 ( .
it comes from the german word " au " , meaning floodplain .
the historic old town forms an irregular square .
to the south is the laurenzenvorstadt , that is , the part of the town formerly outside the city wall .
one characteristic of the city is its painted gables .
the old town , laurenzenvorstadt , government building , cantonal library , state archive and art museum are all listed as heritage sites of national significance .
the buildings in the old city originate , on the whole , from building projects during the 16th century , when nearly all the middle ages buildings were replaced or expanded .
the architectural development of the city ended in the 18th century .
most of the buildings in the " suburb " date from this time .
the schlossli -lrb- small castleocks -rrb- and rore tower have remained nearly unchanged since the 13th century .
the " schlossli " is the oldest building in the city .
it was already founded at the time of the establishment of the city shortly after 1200 .
the city hall was built around rore tower in 1515 .
the upper gate tower is beside the southern gate in the city wall , along the road to lucerne and bern .
the jail has been in it since the middle ages .
a carillon was put in the tower in the middle of the 20th century .
the town church was built in 1471 .
during the reformation in 1528 , its twelve altars and pictures were destroyed .
the fountain is made of limestone , so the name was made of a statue of lady justice made of sandstone .
it was moved to its present location in front of the town church in 1905 .
as of 2007 , aarau had an unemployment rate of 2.35 % .
about 9 businesses involved in this sector .
4,181 people are employed in the secondary sector .
20,186 people are employed in the tertiary sector .
this is a total of over 24,000 jobs .
s of 2000 there were 8,050 total workers who lived in the municipality .
of these , 4,308 or about 53.5 % of the people worked outside aarau while 17,419 people changed into the municipality for work .
there were 21,161 jobs each week at least 6 hours per week williamsburg in the municipality .
the largest employer in aarau is the cantonal government .
one of the two head offices of the " aargauer zeitung " , switzerland 's fifth largest newspaper , is in aarau .
kern & co . , founded in 1819 , was an internationally known geodetic instrument manufacturer based in aarau .
it was taken over by wild leitz in 1988 , and was closed in 1991 .
more than half of the workers in aarau live in the city 's suburbs , or farther away in the surrounding area .
this leads to a busy rush hour , and regular traffic jams .
statistically , aarau has the most jobs per capita of any swiss city .
the small scale of aarau makes it to continually expand the borders of its growth .
the city is in the middle of the " golden triangle " between zu rich , bern , and basel .
the idea of merging aarau with its neighboring suburbs has been recently discussed in the hope of arresting the slowly going losses .
making things include bells , mathematical instruments , electrical goods , cotton textiles , chemicals , shoes , and other products .
aarau is famous for the quality of their musical instruments , cutlery and their bells .
every saturday morning there is a vegetable market in the " graben " at the edge of the old city .
it is supplied with regional products .
in the last week of september the magnified market of aarauer tradesmenhausen takes place there .
the " rueblimart " is held in the same place on the first wednesday in november .
the aarau fair is held in the ice skating rink during the spring .
aarau is a terminus of the s-bahn zurich on the line s3 .
the town is also served with public transport provided by busbetrieb aarau ag .
the population of aarau grew continuously from 1800 until about 1960 .
however , since 1960 the population has fallen by 8 % .
there are three reasons for this population loss : firstly , since the completion of telli wouldn , the city has not had any more considerable land developments .
secondly , the number of people per household has fallen .
thirdly , population growth was absorbed by neighboring municipalities in the regional urban area , and numerous citizens of aarau moved into the countryside .
this trend might have stopped since the turn of the 21st century .
existing industrial developments are being used instead of standing empty .
aarau has a population density of 31 december 2017 estimate of .
about 19 % of the people in the country are foreign nationals .
over the last 10 years the population has grown at a rate of 1 % .
most of the populationouth speaks germanized .
1,296 children or 8.1 % of the population are between 0 and 9 years old and 1,334 teenagers or 8.4 % are between 10 and 19 .
of the adult population , 2,520 people or 15.8 % of the population are between 20 and 29 years old .
2,518 people are between 30 and 39,2 , 320 people or 14.6 % are between 40 and 49 , and 1,987 people are between 50 and 59 .
there are 942 people who are between 80 and 89 , and there are 90 % who are between 90 and 89 .
s of 2000 , there were 1,365 homes with 1 or 2 persons in the household , 3,845 homes with 3 or 4 persons in the household , and 2,119 homes with 5 or more persons in the household .
the average number of people per household was 1.99 individuals .
in 2008 there were 1,594 single family homesports .
in aarau about 74.2 % of the population whom are between age 25 – 64 dubai have completed either non-mandatory upper secondary education nor additional higher education education education equivalent to a university or university .
there are 280 students attending primary school .
the football club fc aarau play in the stadion brugglifeld .
from 1981 until 2010 they played in the top tier of the swiss football league system .
in the 2013 / 2014 they climbed back to the top tier only to be relegated again .
in the 2016 / 17 season they play in the swiss challenge league .
they won the swiss cup in 1985 .
they play in the mysports league .
they play their home games in the keba aarau arena .
aarau is home to a number of sites that are listed as swiss heritage sites of national significance .
the list includes three churches : the christian catholic parish house , the catholic parish house , and the reformed city church .
the cantonal library , which has many pieces important to the nation 's history , and art gallery , the old cantonal school , the legislature , the cantonal administration building , and the archives .
three gardens or parks are on the list .
the remaining four buildings on the list are : the former rickenbach factory , the crematorium , the " haus zum erker " at rathausgasse 10 and the " restaurant zunftstube " at pelzgasse .
the bally shoe company has a unique shoe museum in the city .
there is also the trade museum which has stained glass windows from muri convent and paintings .
from the 2000 census , 4,473 or 28.9 % are roman catholic , while 6,738 or 43.6 % belonged to the swiss reformed church .
of the rest of the population , there are 51 individualsisches or about 0.33 % of the populationzbeks who belong to the christian faith .
in place of a town meeting , a town assembly ¥ of 50 members is elected by the citizens .
it is responsible for approving tax levels , preparing the annual account , and the business report .
it also has regulations that make it .
the term of office is four years .
at the district level , some parts of the government remain a direct democracy .
there are optional and obligatory referendums .
the executive authority is the town councilwoman .
the term of office is four years .
it leads and represents the municipality .
it carries out the resolutions of the assembly , and those requested by the canton and national level governments .
in the 2007 federal election the most popular party was the sp which received 27.9 % of the vote .
the next three most popular parties were the svpstered 22.1 % shareholder , the fdproller 17.5 %strels , and the green party candidates candidates candidates candidates .
the coat of arms of the city is " argent an eagle displayed sable beaked langued and membered gules and a chief of the last " .
