leonardo da vinci -lrb- leonardo di ser piero da vinci ; 14 / 15 april 1452 – 2 may 1519 -rrb- was an italian polymath of the renaissance whose areas of interest included drawing , painting , sculpture , architecture , science , music , mathematics , literature , geology , botany , botany , astronomy , palaeontology and cartography .
he is widely considered one of the greatest painters of all time .
the mona lisa is the most famous of his works and the most popular portrait ever made .
his " vitruvian man " drawing is regarded as a cultural icon as well .
leonardo 's paintings and preparatory drawings – together with his notebooks , which contain sketches , scientific diagrams , and his thoughts on the nature of painting – compose a contribution to later generations of artists rivalled only by that of his contemporary michelangelo .
leonardo is considered one of the most diversely talented individuals ever to have lived .
art historian helen gardner said that the scope and depth of his interests were without precedent in recorded history , and " his mind and personality seem to us superhuman , while the man himself mysterious and remote . "
scholars interpret his view of the world as being based in logic , though the empirical methods he used were unorthodox for his time .
leonardo is revered for his technological ingenuity .
he designed flying machines , a type of armoured fighting vehicle , concentrated solar power , an adding machine , and the double hull .
relatively few of his designs were constructed or even feasible during his lifetime , as the modern scientific approaches to metallurgy and engineering were only in their infancy during the renaissance .
some of his smaller inventions , however , entered the world of manufacturing unheralded , such as an automated bobbin winder and a machine for testing the tensile strength of wire .
he is also credited with the invention of the parachute , helicopter , and tank .
he made substantial discoveries in anatomy , civil engineering , geology , optics , and hydrodynamics , but he did not publish his findings and they had no direct influence on later science .
leonardo was born in florence , italy .
much of his working life was spent in the service of ludovico il moro in milan .
he spent his last years in france at the home awarded to him by francis i .
leonardo was born in 1452 in vinci , italy .
he was the son of messer piero fruosino di antonio da vinci , a rich florentine legal notary .
leonardo was a slave of foreign origin .
leonardo had no surname in the modern sense , da vinci simply meaning ' of vinci ' .
leonardo spent his first years in the hamlet of anchiano in the home of his mother .
he died young in 1465 without children .
in 1468 , when leonardo was 16 , his father married again to francesca lanfredini , who also died without children .
piero 's legitimate heirs were born from his third wife margherita di guglielmo , who gave birth to six children , and his fourth and final wife , lucrezia cortigiani , who bore him another six children .
leonardo had 12 half-siblings , who were much younger than he wasvius the last was born when leonardo was 40 years old ; and with whom he had very little contact .
leonardo studied in latin , geometry and mathematics .
leonardo recorded several childhood incidents .
he thought this was an omen of his writing on the subject .
the second was to find out what was inside of the mountain .
he also seems to have remembered some of his childhood observations of water , writing and crossing out the name of his hometown in one of his notebooks on the formation of rivers .
leonardo 's early life has been the subject of historical conjecture .
vasari , the 16th-century biographer of renaissance painters , tells leonardo leonardo leonardo as a very young man : a peasant made himself a round shield and requested that ser piero have it painted for him .
leonardo was inspired by the story of medusa , who responded with a painting of a monster spitting fire that was so terrifying that his father bought a different shield to give to the peasant .
in the mid-1460s , leonardo 's family moved to florence .
leonardo became an apprentice at the age of 17 .
other famous painters apprenticed in the workshop or associated with it include ghirlandaio , perugino , botticelli , and lorenzo di credi .
leonardo was learning to both theoretical training and a wide range of technical skills , including drafting , chemistry , metallurgy , metal working , plaster casting , leather working , mechanics , and wood-work .
most of the painting in verrocchio 's workshop was done by his employees .
vasari said that leonardo worked with verrocchio on his " the baptism of christ " .
close examination reveals areas of the work that have been painted or touched-up over the tempera .
verrocchio made a bronze statue of " david " in the bargello .
leonardo became a master in the guild of st luke , the guild of artists and doctors of medicine , but even after his father set him up in his own workshop , verrocchio was so interested in verrocchio .
leonardo 's earliest known work is of the arno valley , which has been cited as the first ' pure ' landscape in the occident .
vasari said that leonardo was the first to suggest making the arno river a channel between florence and pisa .
in january 1478 , leonardo got an independent commission to paint an altarpiece for the chapel of st . bernard in the palazzo vecchio .
leonardo lived with the medici and often worked in the garden of the piazza san marco , florence .
in march 1481 , he received a commission from the monks of " the adoration of the magi " .
leonardo went to offer his services to duke of milan ludovico sforza .
in 1482 , he casted a silver stringed instrument from a horse 's skull and ram horns to bring to sforza .
leonardo stayed in milan from 1482 to 1499 .
he was asked to paint the " virgin of the rocks " for the confraternity of the immaculate conception and " the last supper " for the monastery of santa maria delle grazie .
in the spring of 1485 , leonardo travelled to hungary to meet matthias corvinus .
leonardo was employed on many other projects for sforza .
this would have become the only two large equestrian statues of the renaissance , donatello 's " gattamelata " in padua and verrocchio 's " bartolomeo colleoni " in venice , and became known as the " gran cavallo " .
in november 1494 , ludovico gave the bronze to be used for a cannon to defend the city from charles viii .
leonardo left milan with his servant salai and the mathematician luca pacioli .
there , he was employed as a military architect and engineer .
when he returned to florence in 1500 , he and his household were guests of the servite monks at the monastery of santissima annunziata .
leonardo travelled around italy with borgia , the son of pope alexander vi .
leonardo created a map of cesare borgia 's stronghold , a town plan of imola in order to win his patronage .
maps were very rare at the time and it would have seemed like a new idea .
leonardo worked as a military engineer and architect .
later in the year , leonardo produced another map for his patron , one of chiana valley , tuscany .
he created this map to allow a supply of water to sustain the canal during all seasons .
he rejoined the guild of st luke on 18 october 1503 .
leonardo worked on a portrait of lisa del giocondo .
in 1504 , michelangelo was part of a committee to suggested where michelangelo 's statue of david should be placed .
michelangelo then spent two years in florence and spent two years in painting a mural of the battle of anghiari for the signoria .
while in florence , leonardo wrote in the " codex atlanticus " of the da vinci globemind 1504dilly canal .
in 1506 , leonardo was summoned to milan by charles ii of france .
the council of florence wished leonardo to return to the battle of anghiari .
leonardo may have commenced a project for an equestrian figure of d ' amboise .
leonardo was free to pursue his scientific interests .
some of his pupils either knew or worked with him in milan .
in 1507 , leonardo was in florence sorting out a dispute with his brothers over the estate of his father , who had died in 1504 .
he lived in his own house in porta orientale in the parish of santa babila .
in 1512 , leonardo was working on plans for an equestrian monument for gian giacomo trivulzio , but this was prevented by an invasion of swiss , spanish and venetian forces , which drove the french from milan .
he stayed in the city for several months in 1513 at the medici 's vaprio d ' adda villa .
in march of that year , lorenzo de ' medici 's son giovanni took the papacyolithic as leo x ɔ ; leonardo went to rome that september , where he was received by pope 's brother giuliano .
from september 1513 to 1516 , leonardo spent much of his time living in the belvedere courtyard reorganisation designed by donato bramantettes in the apostolic palace , where michelangelo and raphael were both active .
leonardo was given an allowance of 33 ducats a month .
he cancelled it impatiently when the artist set about developing a new kind of varnish .
in october 1515 , king francis i of france captured milan .
leonardo was present at the meeting of francis i and pope leo x , in bologna .
in 1516 , leonardo entered francis 's service .
he made a mechanical lion , which during a pageant walked toward the king and opened its chest to reveal a cluster of lilies .
leonardo was accompanied by his friend and apprentice , francesco melzi , and supported by a pension totalling 10,000 scudi .
at some point , melzi drew a ; the only others known from his lifetime were a sketch by an unknown assistant on the back of one of leonardo 's studiescologist giovanni ambrogio figino .
leonardo 's right hand is paralytic at the age of 65 .
he continued to work until eventually becoming ill and bedridden for several months .
leonardo died at clos luce , italy , on may 2,1519 .
he had become a close friend .
vasari describes leonardo as lamenting on his deathbed , full of repentance , that " he had offended against god and men by failing to practice his art as he should have done . "
in his last days , leonardo sent for a priest to make his confession and receive the holy sacrament .
vasari also records that the king held leonardo 's head in his arms as he died , although this is legend rather than fact .
in his will , sixty beggars carried tapers .
melzi was the main heir and executor , receiving , money , leonardo 's paintings , tools , library and personal effects .
leonardo also remembered his other long-time pupil salai , and his servant battista di vilussis , who each received half of leonardo 's vineyards .
his brothers received land , and his serving woman received a cloak .
leonardo was buried in the collegiate church of saint florentin .
francis was reported by benvenuto cellini , a goldsmith and sculptor .
leonardo was the center of christian humanist thought and culture .
leonardo started his apprenticeship with verrocchio in 1466 .
the painter uccello , whose early experiments with perspective were to influence the development of landscape painting , was a very old man .
the painters piero della francesca and filippo lippi , sculptor luca della robbia , and architect and writer leon battista alberti were in their sixties .
the most famous artists of the next generation were verrocchio , antonio del pollaiuolo , and the portrait sculptor mino da fiesole .
leonardo 's youth was spent in florence and was made into a work of the artists and by donatello 's contemporaries , masaccio .
piero della francesca had made a detailed study of perspective , and was the first painter to study light .
these studies and alberti 's " de pictura " were to have a big effect on younger artists and in particular on leonardo 's own observations and artworks .
the tradition of painting in florence was the small altarpiece of the virgin and child .
many of these were made in tempera or glazed terracotta by the workshops of filippo lippi , verrocchio and the prolific della robbia family .
in the latter , leonardo 's early madonnas such as " the madonna with a carnation " and " benois madonna " followed this tradition while showing idiosyncratic departures .
leonardo 's later paintings such as " the virgin and child with st . anne " came out .
leonardo was a contemporary of botticelli , domenico ghirlandaio and perugino , who were all slightly older than he was .
he met them at the workshop of verrocchio .
botticelli was a particular favourite of the medici family .
ghirlandaio and perugino were both prolific and ran large workshops .
they gave commissions to well-satisfied people who liked ghirlandaio 's ability to show the wealthy citizens of florence within large religious frescoes , and perugino 's ability to deliver a multitude of saints and angels of innocence .
the work started with perugino in 1479 .
leonardo was not part of this famous commission .
his first important work was the " adoration of the magi " for the monks of scopeto .
in 1476 , during the time of leonardo 's association with verrocchio 's workshop , the portinari altarpiece by hugo van der goes to florence , bringing from northern europe new painterly techniques that were to profoundly affect leonardo , ghirlandaio , perugino and others .
in 1479 , the sicilian painter antonello da messina travelled north on his way to venice .
leonardo was also to go to venice .
leonardo experimented with designs for centrally planned churches , as both plans and views , although none was ever realised .
leonardo 's political contemporaries were lorenzo de ' medici biennale il magnificodilly , who was three years older , and his younger brother giuliano , who was killed in the pazzi conspiracy in 1478 .
leonardo was sent as an ambassador to milan by the medici court to ludovico il moro , who ruled milan between 1479 and 1499 .
he also studied the older humanist philosophers of whom marsiglio ficino , proponent of neo platonism ; cristoforo landino , writer of commentaries on classical writings , and john argyropoulos , teacher of greek and translator of aristotle were the foremost .
he was also associated with the academy of the medici .
leonardo later wrote in the margin of a journal , " the medici made me and the medici destroyed me " .
leonardo was employed by lorenzo that leonardo received his employment at the court of milan .
the three greatest painters of the high renaissance , leonardo , michelangelo and raphael were all the greatest painters of the time .
leonardo was born in michelangelo 's family .
he died in 1520 , the year after michelangelo 's death , but michelangelo went on making for another 45 years .
leonardo 's great strength and generosity , as described by vasari , as well as all other aspects of his life , attracted the curiosity of others .
vasari said that he bought caged birds and released them .
leonardo had many friends who are now renowned either in their fields or for their historical importance .
he wrote a book about mathematics called " divina proportione " in the 1490s .
leonardo seems to have had no close relationships with women except for his friendship with cecilia gallerani and the two este sisters , beatrice and isabella .
while on a journey that took him through mantua , he drew a portrait of isabella that appears to have been used to create a painted portrait , now lost .
leonardo kept his private life secret .
his sexuality has been the subject of satire , analysis , and speculation .
sigmund freud revived this trend in the mid-16th century .
leonardo 's most intimate relationships were perhaps with his pupils salai and melzi .
melzi , writing to tell leonardo 's brothers of his death , said leonardo 's feelings for his pupils as both loving and passionate .
it has been claimed since the 16th century that these relationships were of a sexual or erotic nature .
leonardo and three other young men were charged with sodomy .
the charges were dismissed for lack of evidence .
since that date much has been written about his homosexuality and its role in his art , particularly in the androgyny and eroticism in john the baptist and bacchus .
gian giacomo caprotti da oreno , nicknamed salai or il salainoailing ' the little unclean one ' i . e . , the devil arrived in leonardo 's household in 1490 .
after only a year , leonardo made a list of his misdemeanours , calling him " a thief , a liar , stubborn , and a glutton " , after he had made off with money and valuables on at least five occasions and spent a fortune on clothes .
he stayed in leonardo 's household for the next thirty years .
salai executed a number of paintings under the name of andrea salai .
in 1515 , he painted a nude version of the " mona lisa " , known as " " .
salai owned the " mona lisa " at the time of his death in 1524 .
in 1506 , leonardo took on another pupil , count francesco melzi , the son of a lombard aristocrat .
he stayed with leonardo until his death .
melzi inherited the artistic and scientific works , manuscripts , and collections of leonardo and administered the estate .
despite the fact that leonardo was a scientist and inventor , leonardo spent the last hundred years his fame .
a handful of works that are authenticated or attributed to him have been regarded as among the great masterpieces .
they are discussed at great length by connoisseurs and critics .
by the 1490s , leonardo was a " divine " painter .
among the qualities that make leonardo 's work unique are his innovative techniques for laying on the paint ; his detailed knowledge of anatomy , light , botany and geology ; his interest in physiognomy and the way humans register emotion in expression and gesture ; his innovative use of the human form in figurative composition ; and his use of subtle gradation of tone .
all these qualities come together in his most famous works , the mona lisa , the " last supper " , and the " virgin of the rocks " .
leonardo became famous for his work on the " baptism of christ " , painted in conjunction with verrocchio .
two other paintings appear to date from his time at verrocchio 's workshop .
one is small , 59 cm long and 14 cm high .
it is a " predella " to go at the base of a larger composition , a painting by lorenzo di credi from which it has become separated .
the other is a much larger work , 217 cm long .
in both annunciations , leonardo used a formal arrangement , like two well-known pictures by fra angelico of the same subject , of the virgin mary sitting or kneeling to the right of the picture , approached from the left by an angel in profile , with a rich flowing garment , raised wings and bearing a lily .
the work is now generally attributed to leonardo .
in the smaller painting , mary averts her eyes and folds her hands in a gesture that symbolizes submission to god 's will .
mary is not submissive .
she puts a finger in her bible to mark the place and raises her hand in a formal gesture of greeting or surprise .
this calm young woman appears to accept her role as the mother of god , not with resignation but with confidence .
in this painting , the young leonardo presents the face of the virgin mary .
in the 1480s , leonardo received two very important commissions and started another work that was of ground-breaking importance in terms of composition .
two of the three were never finished .
one of these paintings was " saint jerome in the wilderness " .
although the painting is barely begun , the composition can be seen and is very unusual .
jerome , as a penitent , occupies the middle of the picture , set on a slight diagonal and viewed somewhat from above .
his kneeling form takes on a trapezoid shape , with one arm stretched to the edge of the painting and his gaze looking in the opposite direction .
j . wasserman points out the link between this painting and leonardo 's anatomical studies .
across the foreground sprawls his symbol , a great lion whose body and tail make a double spiral across the base of the picture space .
the other remarkable feature is the sketchy landscape of craggy rocks against which the figure is silhouetted .
the daring display of figure composition , the landscape elements and personal drama also appear in the great unfinished masterpiece , the " adoration of the magi " , a commission from the monks of san donato a scopeto .
it is a complex composition , of about 250 x 250 centimetres .
leonardo did many drawings and preparatory studies .
in 1482 leonardo went to milan to win favour with ludovico il moro .
the third important work of this period is the " virgin of the rocks " , commissioned in milan for the confraternity of the immaculate conception .
the painting was to be done with the help of the de predis brothers .
leonardo chose to paint an apocryphal moment when the infant john the baptist , in protection of an angel , met the holy family on the road to egypt .
the painting shows an eerie beauty as the graceful figures kneel in adoration around the infant christ in a wild landscape of tumbling rock and whirling water .
the painting is quite large , but it is not nearly as complex as the painting ordered by the monks of st donato .
leonardo took the other to france .
the brothers did not get their painting until the next century .
leonardo 's most famous painting of the 1490s is " the last supper " , commissioned for the refectory of the convent of santa maria della grazie in milan .
it shows the last meal shared by jesus with his disciples before his capture and death .
bandello wrote that some days he would paint from morning till night without stopping to eat .
leonardo asked ludovico to come .
leonardo told the duke that he might use the prior as his model .
when finished , the painting was considered a masterpiece of design and characterisation , but it was quickly deteriorated quickly .
leonardo , instead of using the reliable technique of fresco , had used tempera over a ground that was mainly gesso , resulting in a surface subject to mould and to flaking .
despite this , the painting remains one of the most reproduced works of art .
remarkable is the portrait of cecilia galleranidilly , who was the lover of leonardo 's patron ludovico sforza .
interpretation of the portrait says that it has allegorical elements .
the ermine she holds is an allegorical statement of that fact .
the greek name " gale " is also used for the greek name of the model : gallerani .
the animal is also a readable symbol of ludovico sforza himself , called by the contemporary " ermellino " , meaning " ermine " , in reference to the prestigious order of the ermine , of which he was a beholder , and whose image he used as his emblem .
the painting hangs in the national museum in krakow , poland .
among the works made by leonardo in the 16th century is the small portrait known as the " mona lisa " or " la gioconda " , the laughing one .
it is arguably the most famous painting in the world .
its fame rests , in particular , on the elusive smile on the woman 's face , its mysterious quality perhaps due to the subtly shadowed corners of the mouth and eyes such that the exact nature of the smile is determined .
the quality for which the work is called " sfumato " , or leonardo 's smoke .
vasari said that " the smile was so pleasing that it seemed divine rather than human ; and those who saw it was amazed to find that it was as alive as the original " .
the landscape , in which the world seems to be in a state of flux , the subdued colouring , and the extremely smooth nature of the painterly technique , employing oils laid on much like tempera , and so on the surface that the brushstrokes are blended .
vasari said that the manner of painting would make even " the most confident master . . despair and lose heart . "
the perfect state of preservation is rare in a panel painting of this date .
in the painting " virgin and child with st . anne " , the composition again picks up the theme of figures in a landscape .
the painting unusual is that there are two obliquely set figures superimposed .
she is seated on the knee of her mother , st anne .
she lean forward to restrain the christ child as he plays roughly with a lamb , the sign of his impending sacrifice .
this painting was copied many times , and influenced by michelangelo , raphael , and andrea del sarto .
the trends in composition were adopted in particular by the venetian painters tintoretto and veronese .
leonardo 's " the battle of anghiara " was a fresco in 1505 for the salone dei cinquecento reeling hall of the five hundred sellers sellers palazzo vecchio , florence .
the story of the battle shows four men riding raging war horses engaged in a battle for possession of a standard , at the battle of anghiari in 1440 .
michelangelo had just finished his " david " .
all that remains of leonardo 's work is a copy by rubens , but maurizio seracini is convinced it can still be found and has spent a lifetime looking for it .
he was allowed to drill some pilot holes in a mural in the salone dei cinquecento .
in the sforza castle in milan , there is a room decorated with the fresco technique by leonardo and his assistants : sala delle asse iec in english ' room of the wooden boards ' covering the wooden boards ' .
the room was decorated with a trompe-l ' œil depicting trees , with an labyrinth of leaves and knots on the ceiling .
the red fruits of mulberryerryrence in local dialect showed the name of " ludovico il moro " , duke of milan at that time .
the first document about leonardo 's room and leonardo 's work dates back to 1498 : on 21 april , the secretary confirms to the duke that " magistro leonardo " will complete the decoration by september .
two restorations were made in 1902 and 1956 .
another restoration is currently under way , thanks to which beautiful preparatory drawings have been uncovered on the walls : roots of trees penetrating the stones of the foundations .
leonardo was not a prolific painter , but he kept some of his pictures full of detail and detailed drawings recording all manner of things that took his attention .
some of his studies can be seen as preparatory to particular works such as " the adoration of the magi " , " the virgin of the rocks " and " the last supper " .
his earliest dated drawing is a " landscape of the arno valley " , 1473 , which shows the river , the mountains , montelupo castle and the farmlands beyond it in great detail .
according to art historian ludwig heydenreich , this is " the first true landscape in art . "
massimo polidoro says that it was the first landscape " not to be the background of some religious scene or a portrait .
it is the first documented time where a landscape was drawn just for the sake of it .
among his famous drawings are the " vitruvian man " , a study of the proportions of the human body ; the " head of an angel " , for " the virgin of the rocks " in the louvre ; a botanical study of " star of bethlehem " ; and a large drawing 160 ×100 cm in black coloured paper on st . john , the st . anne gallery , coloured the " st .
this drawing uses the " sfumato " technique of shading , in the manner of the mona lisa .
leonardo never made a painting from it .
other drawings of interest include numerous studies generally referred to as " caricatures " .
vasari says that leonardo saw a person with an interesting face he would follow them all day observing them .
there are many studies of beautiful young men .
these faces are different from that of a warrior .
salai is often seen in fancy dress .
leonardo is known to have designed sets for pageants with which these may be associated .
other , often meticulous , drawings show studies of drapery .
leonardo used to draw drapery in his early works .
another often-reproduced drawing is a macabre sketch that was done by leonardo in florence in 1479 .
in his notes , leonardo recorded the colours of the robes that baroncelli was wearing when he died .
renaissance humanism recognised no mutually exclusive polarities between the sciences and the arts , and leonardo 's studies in science and engineering are sometimes considered as impressive and innovative as his artistic work .
these studies were recorded in 13,000 pages of notes and drawings .
they were made and kept daily throughout leonardo 's life and travels , as he made continual observations of the world around him .
leonardo 's notes and drawings show a lot of interests and preoccupations , some as mundane as lists of groceries and people who owed him money .
there are compositions for paintings , studies of details and drapery , studies of faces and emotions , of animals , babies , dissections , plant studies , whirlpools , war machines , flying machines and architecture .
these notebooks have been found in major collections such as the royal library at windsor castle , the louvre , the victoria and albert museum , the biblioteca nacional de espana , the victoria and albert museum , the biblioteca nacional ambrosiana in milan , which holds the 12-volume apologious msl .
the " codex leicester " is the only major scientific work of leonardo in private hands .
leonardo is most famous for his writings in mirror-image cursive .
leonardo wrote with his left hand .
leonardo uses a variety of shorthand and symbols .
in many cases a single topic is covered in both words and pictures on a single sheet .
why they were not published during leonardo 's lifetime is unknown .
leonardo 's approach to science was observational : he tried to understand a phenomenon by describing and depicting it in utmost detail and did not emphasise experiments or theoretical explanation .
today , scholars mostly ignored leonardo the scientist , although he did teach himself latin .
in the 1490s , he studied mathematics under luca pacioli .
while living in milan , he studied light from the summit of monte rosa .
scientific writings in his notebook on fossils have been considered as influential on early palaeontology and he has been called the father of ichnology .
the content of his journals suggest that he was planning a series of books to be published on a variety of subjects .
a treatise on anatomy was published in 1517 .
he published his work on the studies of anatomy , light and the landscape .
the treatise , which in france went into 62 editions in fifty years , caused leonardo to be seen as " the precursor of french academic thought on art " .
leonardo was a fundamentally different kind of scientist from galileo , newton and other scientists who followed him in that , as a renaissance man , his theorising and hypothesising integrated the arts and particularly painting .
he demanded that his students develop a deep knowledge of the subject .
as an artist , he quickly became master of " topographic anatomy " , drawing many studies of muscles , tendons and other visible anatomical features .
leonardo was given permission to dissect human corpses at the hospital of santa maria nuova in florence and later at hospitals in milan and rome .
from 1510 to 1511 , he worked with the doctor marcantonio della torre .
leonardo made over 240 detailed drawings and wrote about 13,000 words towards a treatise on anatomy .
leonardo 's idiosyncratic writing was a great deal of his work .
the project was left unfinished at the time of melzi 's death more than 50 years later .
during the time melzi was ordering the material into chapters for publication , they were examined by a number of anatomists and artists , including vasari , cellini and albrecht durer , who made a number of drawings from them .
leonardo 's anatomical drawings include many studies of the human skeleton and its parts , and of muscles and sinews .
he studied the mechanical functions of the skeleton and muscular forces that are applied to it in a manner that prefigured the modern science of biomechanics .
he drew the heart and vascular system , the sex organs and other internal organs , making one of the first scientific drawings of a fetus " in utero " .
the drawings and notation are far ahead of their time , and if published would undoubtedly have made a major contribution to medical science .
leonardo also carefully studied the effects of rage and human emotions .
he drew many figures who had significant facial deformities or signs of illness .
leonardo also studied and drew the anatomy of many animals , birds , monkeys , bears , and frogs .
he also made a number of studies of horses .
leonardo 's dissections and documentation of muscles , nerves , and vessels helped to describe the physiology and mechanics of movement .
he attempted to identify the source of ' emotions ' and their expression .
eventually he abandoned these physiological explanations of bodily functions .
he made the observations that humors were not in cerebral spaces or ventricles .
he said that the humours were not in the heart or the liver , and that it was the heart that defined the circulatory system .
he was the first to define atherosclerosis and liver cirrhosis .
he created models of the cerebral ventricles with the use of melted wax and constructed a glass aorta to observe the circulation of blood through the aortic valve by using water and grass seed to watch flow patterns .
vesalius published his work on anatomy and physiology in " de humani corporis fabrica " in 1543 .
leonardo was valued as an engineer .
in a letter to ludovico il moro , he wrote that he could create all sorts of machines both for the protection of a city and for siege .
when he fled to venice in 1499 , he found employment as an engineer .
in 1502 , he created a plan for diverting the flow of the arno river , a project on which niccolo machiavelli also worked .
he continued to contemplate the canalization of lombardy 's plains while in louis xii 's company and of the loire and its tributaries in the company of francis i . leonardo 's journals include a vast number of inventions , both practical and impractical .
they include musical instruments , a mechanical knight , hydraulic pumps , reversible crank mechanisms , finned mortar shells , and a steam cannon .
in 1502 , leonardo produced a drawing of a single span 720 ft bridge as part of a civil engineering project for ottoman sultan beyazid ii of constantinople .
the bridge was meant to span an inlet at the mouth of the bosporus known as the golden horn .
beyazid did not start the project because he believed that such a construction was impossible .
in 2001 , a smaller bridge was built in norway .
leonardo was fascinated by the phenomenon of flight for much of his life , producing many studies , including " codex on the flight of birds " — 1505dilly , as well as plans for several flying machines such as a flapping ornithopter and a machine with a helical rotor .
the british television station channel four commissioned a 2003 documentary , " leonardo 's dream machines " , in which various designs by leonardo , such as a parachute and a giant crossbow , were interpreted , constructed and tested .
some of those designs proved successful , while others did less well when practically tested .
leonardo was famous for his death , and was claimed to have supported him in his old age and held him in his arms as he died .
leonardo and his work have never been very interested in the city .
crowds still queue to see his best-known artworks , t-shirts still bear his most famous drawing , and writers continue to hail him as a genius while speculating about his private life , as well as about what one so intelligent actually believed in .
leonardo was admired by painters , critics and historians .
baldassare castiglione , author of " il cortegiano "nosis ' the courtier 'sitor , wrote in 1528 : " . . . another of the greatest painters in this world looks down on this art in which he is unequalled . . . " while the biographer known as " anonimo gaddiano " , wrote that it was so so that it was a rare .
in the 19th century , leonardo liked leonardo 's genius , causing him to be interested in the work : " such was the dawn of modern art , when leonardo da vinci broke forth with a splendour that distanced former excellence : made up of all the elements that constitute the essence of all the geniuses : " this is echoed by a . . . . . . the other artists who illustrated the world through the towered by the towered by the tower . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . the other artists who illustrated by the world through the world . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . the other artists in the other the three three three three three three three three three three three three three three three three three three three three more more more
by the 19th century , leonardo 's large works were known , as well as his paintings .
hippolyte taine wrote in 1866 : " there may not be in the world an example of another genius so universal , so incapable of fulfilment , so full of yearning for the infinite , so naturally refined , so far ahead of his own century and the following centuries . "
art historian bernard berenson wrote in 1896 : " leonardo is the one artist of whom it may be said with perfect literalness : nothing that he touched but turned into a thing of eternal beauty .
he had his feeling for line and for light and shade , forever transmuted it into life-communicating values . "
the interest in leonardo 's genius has continued unabated .
liana bortolon , writing in 1967 , said : " because of the multiplicity of interests that spurred him to pursue every field of knowledge . . . leonardo can be considered , quite rightly , to have been the universal genius par excellence , and with all the disquieting overtones inherent in that term .
man is as uncomfortable today , faced with a genius , as he was in the 16th century .
five centuries have passed , yet we still view leonardo with awe . "
he studied the personal notes , sketches , budget notations , and musings of the man whom he considers the greatest of innovators .
isaacson was surprised to discover a " fun , joyous " side of leonardo in addition to his limitless curiosity and creative genius .
much of the collegiate church of saint florentin , where leonardo was buried , was damaged during the french revolution .
some of the graves were destroyed in the process , leaving leonardo 's remains subject to dispute .
while excavating the site in 1863 , fine-arts inspector general arsene houssaye found a partially complete skeleton with a bronze ring on one finger , some white hair , and stone fragments bearing the inscriptions " eo " , " ar " , " dus " , and " vinc " .
a silver shield found near the bones shows a beardless francis i , corresponding to the king 's appearance during leonardo 's lifetime , and the skull 's inclusion of eight teeth corresponds to someone of approximately the appropriate age .
the unusually large skull led him to believe that he had found leonardo 's remains , but he thought the skeleton seemed too short .
other art historians say that the 1.73 m tall skeleton may be leonardo 's .
the remains , except for the ring and a lock of hair which houssaye kept , were brought to paris in a lead box .
a new memorial was added in the 1930s .
a plaque above the tomb says that the remains are of leonardo .
it has since been theorized that the folding of the skeleton 's right arm over the head may correspond to the paralysis of leonardo 's right hand .
in 2016 , it was announced that dna tests will be conducted to determine whether the attribution is correct .
the dna of the remains is sequenced .
the lock of hair and ring , now in a private us collection , will be displayed in vinci beginning on 2 may 2019 .
" salvator mundi " , a painting by leonardo depicting jesus holding an orb , sold for us $ 450.3 million at a christie 's auction in new york , 15 november 2017 .
the highest price ever paid for a work of art at auction was for pablo picasso 's " les femmes d ' alger " , which sold for us $ 179.4 million in may 2015 at christie 's new york .
