leonardo da vinci -lrb- leonardo di ser piero da vinci ; 14 / 15 april 1452 – 2 may 1519 -rrb- was an italian polymath of the renaissance whose areas of interest included drawing , painting , sculpture , architecture , science , music , mathematics , literature , geology , botany , botany , astronomy , palaeontology and cartography .
leonardo 's paintings and preparatory drawings – together with his notebooks , which contain sketches , scientific diagrams , and his thoughts on the nature of painting – compose a contribution to later generations of artists rivalled only by that of his contemporary michelangelo .
art historian helen gardner said that the scope and depth of his interests were without precedent in recorded history , and " his mind and personality seem to us superhuman , while the man himself mysterious and remote . "
scholars interpret his view of the world as being based in logic , though the empirical methods he used were unorthodox for his time .
he designed flying machines , a type of armoured fighting vehicle , concentrated solar power , an adding machine , and the double hull .
some of his smaller inventions , however , entered the world of manufacturing unheralded , such as an automated bobbin winder and a machine for testing the tensile strength of wire .
he is also credited with the invention of the parachute , helicopter , and tank .
he made substantial discoveries in anatomy , civil engineering , geology , optics , and hydrodynamics , but he did not publish his findings and they had no direct influence on later science .
much of his working life was spent in the service of ludovico il moro in milan .
he spent his last years in france at the home awarded to him by francis i .
leonardo was born in 1452 in vinci , italy .
he was the son of messer piero fruosino di antonio da vinci , a rich florentine legal notary .
in 1468 , when leonardo was 16 , his father married again to francesca lanfredini , who also died without children .
piero 's legitimate heirs were born from his third wife margherita di guglielmo , who gave birth to six children , and his fourth and final wife , lucrezia cortigiani , who bore him another six children .
leonardo studied in latin , geometry and mathematics .
he also seems to have remembered some of his childhood observations of water , writing and crossing out the name of his hometown in one of his notebooks on the formation of rivers .
vasari , the 16th-century biographer of renaissance painters , tells leonardo leonardo leonardo as a very young man : a peasant made himself a round shield and requested that ser piero have it painted for him .
leonardo was inspired by the story of medusa , who responded with a painting of a monster spitting fire that was so terrifying that his father bought a different shield to give to the peasant .
leonardo became an apprentice at the age of 17 .
other famous painters apprenticed in the workshop or associated with it include ghirlandaio , perugino , botticelli , and lorenzo di credi .
most of the painting in verrocchio 's workshop was done by his employees .
leonardo became a master in the guild of st luke , the guild of artists and doctors of medicine , but even after his father set him up in his own workshop , verrocchio was so interested in verrocchio .
leonardo 's earliest known work is of the arno valley , which has been cited as the first ' pure ' landscape in the occident .
vasari said that leonardo was the first to suggest making the arno river a channel between florence and pisa .
in january 1478 , leonardo got an independent commission to paint an altarpiece for the chapel of st . bernard in the palazzo vecchio .
leonardo lived with the medici and often worked in the garden of the piazza san marco , florence .
leonardo stayed in milan from 1482 to 1499 .
he was asked to paint the " virgin of the rocks " for the confraternity of the immaculate conception and " the last supper " for the monastery of santa maria delle grazie .
in the spring of 1485 , leonardo travelled to hungary to meet matthias corvinus .
this would have become the only two large equestrian statues of the renaissance , donatello 's " gattamelata " in padua and verrocchio 's " bartolomeo colleoni " in venice , and became known as the " gran cavallo " .
in november 1494 , ludovico gave the bronze to be used for a cannon to defend the city from charles viii .
there , he was employed as a military architect and engineer .
when he returned to florence in 1500 , he and his household were guests of the servite monks at the monastery of santissima annunziata .
leonardo travelled around italy with borgia , the son of pope alexander vi .
leonardo created a map of cesare borgia 's stronghold , a town plan of imola in order to win his patronage .
later in the year , leonardo produced another map for his patron , one of chiana valley , tuscany .
he rejoined the guild of st luke on 18 october 1503 .
leonardo worked on a portrait of lisa del giocondo .
michelangelo then spent two years in florence and spent two years in painting a mural of the battle of anghiari for the signoria .
the council of florence wished leonardo to return to the battle of anghiari .
leonardo may have commenced a project for an equestrian figure of d ' amboise .
in 1507 , leonardo was in florence sorting out a dispute with his brothers over the estate of his father , who had died in 1504 .
he lived in his own house in porta orientale in the parish of santa babila .
in march of that year , lorenzo de ' medici 's son giovanni took the papacyolithic as leo x ɔ ; leonardo went to rome that september , where he was received by pope 's brother giuliano .
from september 1513 to 1516 , leonardo spent much of his time living in the belvedere courtyard reorganisation designed by donato bramantettes in the apostolic palace , where michelangelo and raphael were both active .
he cancelled it impatiently when the artist set about developing a new kind of varnish .
leonardo was present at the meeting of francis i and pope leo x , in bologna .
he made a mechanical lion , which during a pageant walked toward the king and opened its chest to reveal a cluster of lilies .
at some point , melzi drew a ; the only others known from his lifetime were a sketch by an unknown assistant on the back of one of leonardo 's studiescologist giovanni ambrogio figino .
leonardo 's right hand is paralytic at the age of 65 .
he continued to work until eventually becoming ill and bedridden for several months .
vasari describes leonardo as lamenting on his deathbed , full of repentance , that " he had offended against god and men by failing to practice his art as he should have done . "
in his last days , leonardo sent for a priest to make his confession and receive the holy sacrament .
melzi was the main heir and executor , receiving , money , leonardo 's paintings , tools , library and personal effects .
leonardo also remembered his other long-time pupil salai , and his servant battista di vilussis , who each received half of leonardo 's vineyards .
leonardo was buried in the collegiate church of saint florentin .
the most famous artists of the next generation were verrocchio , antonio del pollaiuolo , and the portrait sculptor mino da fiesole .
leonardo 's youth was spent in florence and was made into a work of the artists and by donatello 's contemporaries , masaccio .
piero della francesca had made a detailed study of perspective , and was the first painter to study light .
these studies and alberti 's " de pictura " were to have a big effect on younger artists and in particular on leonardo 's own observations and artworks .
the tradition of painting in florence was the small altarpiece of the virgin and child .
in the latter , leonardo 's early madonnas such as " the madonna with a carnation " and " benois madonna " followed this tradition while showing idiosyncratic departures .
leonardo was a contemporary of botticelli , domenico ghirlandaio and perugino , who were all slightly older than he was .
they gave commissions to well-satisfied people who liked ghirlandaio 's ability to show the wealthy citizens of florence within large religious frescoes , and perugino 's ability to deliver a multitude of saints and angels of innocence .
in 1476 , during the time of leonardo 's association with verrocchio 's workshop , the portinari altarpiece by hugo van der goes to florence , bringing from northern europe new painterly techniques that were to profoundly affect leonardo , ghirlandaio , perugino and others .
leonardo experimented with designs for centrally planned churches , as both plans and views , although none was ever realised .
leonardo 's political contemporaries were lorenzo de ' medici biennale il magnificodilly , who was three years older , and his younger brother giuliano , who was killed in the pazzi conspiracy in 1478 .
leonardo was sent as an ambassador to milan by the medici court to ludovico il moro , who ruled milan between 1479 and 1499 .
he also studied the older humanist philosophers of whom marsiglio ficino , proponent of neo platonism ; cristoforo landino , writer of commentaries on classical writings , and john argyropoulos , teacher of greek and translator of aristotle were the foremost .
leonardo later wrote in the margin of a journal , " the medici made me and the medici destroyed me " .
leonardo was employed by lorenzo that leonardo received his employment at the court of milan .
he died in 1520 , the year after michelangelo 's death , but michelangelo went on making for another 45 years .
leonardo 's great strength and generosity , as described by vasari , as well as all other aspects of his life , attracted the curiosity of others .
he wrote a book about mathematics called " divina proportione " in the 1490s .
leonardo seems to have had no close relationships with women except for his friendship with cecilia gallerani and the two este sisters , beatrice and isabella .
while on a journey that took him through mantua , he drew a portrait of isabella that appears to have been used to create a painted portrait , now lost .
melzi , writing to tell leonardo 's brothers of his death , said leonardo 's feelings for his pupils as both loving and passionate .
it has been claimed since the 16th century that these relationships were of a sexual or erotic nature .
since that date much has been written about his homosexuality and its role in his art , particularly in the androgyny and eroticism in john the baptist and bacchus .
gian giacomo caprotti da oreno , nicknamed salai or il salainoailing ' the little unclean one ' i . e . , the devil arrived in leonardo 's household in 1490 .
after only a year , leonardo made a list of his misdemeanours , calling him " a thief , a liar , stubborn , and a glutton " , after he had made off with money and valuables on at least five occasions and spent a fortune on clothes .
salai executed a number of paintings under the name of andrea salai .
salai owned the " mona lisa " at the time of his death in 1524 .
in 1506 , leonardo took on another pupil , count francesco melzi , the son of a lombard aristocrat .
melzi inherited the artistic and scientific works , manuscripts , and collections of leonardo and administered the estate .
despite the fact that leonardo was a scientist and inventor , leonardo spent the last hundred years his fame .
among the qualities that make leonardo 's work unique are his innovative techniques for laying on the paint ; his detailed knowledge of anatomy , light , botany and geology ; his interest in physiognomy and the way humans register emotion in expression and gesture ; his innovative use of the human form in figurative composition ; and his use of subtle gradation of tone .
all these qualities come together in his most famous works , the mona lisa , the " last supper " , and the " virgin of the rocks " .
it is a " predella " to go at the base of a larger composition , a painting by lorenzo di credi from which it has become separated .
in both annunciations , leonardo used a formal arrangement , like two well-known pictures by fra angelico of the same subject , of the virgin mary sitting or kneeling to the right of the picture , approached from the left by an angel in profile , with a rich flowing garment , raised wings and bearing a lily .
in the smaller painting , mary averts her eyes and folds her hands in a gesture that symbolizes submission to god 's will .
she puts a finger in her bible to mark the place and raises her hand in a formal gesture of greeting or surprise .
this calm young woman appears to accept her role as the mother of god , not with resignation but with confidence .
in this painting , the young leonardo presents the face of the virgin mary .
jerome , as a penitent , occupies the middle of the picture , set on a slight diagonal and viewed somewhat from above .
his kneeling form takes on a trapezoid shape , with one arm stretched to the edge of the painting and his gaze looking in the opposite direction .
across the foreground sprawls his symbol , a great lion whose body and tail make a double spiral across the base of the picture space .
the daring display of figure composition , the landscape elements and personal drama also appear in the great unfinished masterpiece , the " adoration of the magi " , a commission from the monks of san donato a scopeto .
the third important work of this period is the " virgin of the rocks " , commissioned in milan for the confraternity of the immaculate conception .
leonardo chose to paint an apocryphal moment when the infant john the baptist , in protection of an angel , met the holy family on the road to egypt .
the painting shows an eerie beauty as the graceful figures kneel in adoration around the infant christ in a wild landscape of tumbling rock and whirling water .
the painting is quite large , but it is not nearly as complex as the painting ordered by the monks of st donato .
leonardo 's most famous painting of the 1490s is " the last supper " , commissioned for the refectory of the convent of santa maria della grazie in milan .
when finished , the painting was considered a masterpiece of design and characterisation , but it was quickly deteriorated quickly .
leonardo , instead of using the reliable technique of fresco , had used tempera over a ground that was mainly gesso , resulting in a surface subject to mould and to flaking .
despite this , the painting remains one of the most reproduced works of art .
the animal is also a readable symbol of ludovico sforza himself , called by the contemporary " ermellino " , meaning " ermine " , in reference to the prestigious order of the ermine , of which he was a beholder , and whose image he used as his emblem .
among the works made by leonardo in the 16th century is the small portrait known as the " mona lisa " or " la gioconda " , the laughing one .
its fame rests , in particular , on the elusive smile on the woman 's face , its mysterious quality perhaps due to the subtly shadowed corners of the mouth and eyes such that the exact nature of the smile is determined .
the landscape , in which the world seems to be in a state of flux , the subdued colouring , and the extremely smooth nature of the painterly technique , employing oils laid on much like tempera , and so on the surface that the brushstrokes are blended .
vasari said that the manner of painting would make even " the most confident master . . despair and lose heart . "
she lean forward to restrain the christ child as he plays roughly with a lamb , the sign of his impending sacrifice .
this painting was copied many times , and influenced by michelangelo , raphael , and andrea del sarto .
leonardo 's " the battle of anghiara " was a fresco in 1505 for the salone dei cinquecento reeling hall of the five hundred sellers sellers palazzo vecchio , florence .
the story of the battle shows four men riding raging war horses engaged in a battle for possession of a standard , at the battle of anghiari in 1440 .
michelangelo had just finished his " david " .
all that remains of leonardo 's work is a copy by rubens , but maurizio seracini is convinced it can still be found and has spent a lifetime looking for it .
in the sforza castle in milan , there is a room decorated with the fresco technique by leonardo and his assistants : sala delle asse iec in english ' room of the wooden boards ' covering the wooden boards ' .
the room was decorated with a trompe-l ' œil depicting trees , with an labyrinth of leaves and knots on the ceiling .
the red fruits of mulberryerryrence in local dialect showed the name of " ludovico il moro " , duke of milan at that time .
the first document about leonardo 's room and leonardo 's work dates back to 1498 : on 21 april , the secretary confirms to the duke that " magistro leonardo " will complete the decoration by september .
two restorations were made in 1902 and 1956 .
another restoration is currently under way , thanks to which beautiful preparatory drawings have been uncovered on the walls : roots of trees penetrating the stones of the foundations .
leonardo was not a prolific painter , but he kept some of his pictures full of detail and detailed drawings recording all manner of things that took his attention .
his earliest dated drawing is a " landscape of the arno valley " , 1473 , which shows the river , the mountains , montelupo castle and the farmlands beyond it in great detail .
according to art historian ludwig heydenreich , this is " the first true landscape in art . "
massimo polidoro says that it was the first landscape " not to be the background of some religious scene or a portrait .
it is the first documented time where a landscape was drawn just for the sake of it .
among his famous drawings are the " vitruvian man " , a study of the proportions of the human body ; the " head of an angel " , for " the virgin of the rocks " in the louvre ; a botanical study of " star of bethlehem " ; and a large drawing 160 ×100 cm in black coloured paper on st . john , the st . anne gallery , coloured the " st .
this drawing uses the " sfumato " technique of shading , in the manner of the mona lisa .
vasari says that leonardo saw a person with an interesting face he would follow them all day observing them .
leonardo is known to have designed sets for pageants with which these may be associated .
another often-reproduced drawing is a macabre sketch that was done by leonardo in florence in 1479 .
in his notes , leonardo recorded the colours of the robes that baroncelli was wearing when he died .
they were made and kept daily throughout leonardo 's life and travels , as he made continual observations of the world around him .
leonardo 's notes and drawings show a lot of interests and preoccupations , some as mundane as lists of groceries and people who owed him money .
there are compositions for paintings , studies of details and drapery , studies of faces and emotions , of animals , babies , dissections , plant studies , whirlpools , war machines , flying machines and architecture .
these notebooks have been found in major collections such as the royal library at windsor castle , the louvre , the victoria and albert museum , the biblioteca nacional de espana , the victoria and albert museum , the biblioteca nacional ambrosiana in milan , which holds the 12-volume apologious msl .
the " codex leicester " is the only major scientific work of leonardo in private hands .
leonardo uses a variety of shorthand and symbols .
in many cases a single topic is covered in both words and pictures on a single sheet .
while living in milan , he studied light from the summit of monte rosa .
the content of his journals suggest that he was planning a series of books to be published on a variety of subjects .
a treatise on anatomy was published in 1517 .
he published his work on the studies of anatomy , light and the landscape .
the treatise , which in france went into 62 editions in fifty years , caused leonardo to be seen as " the precursor of french academic thought on art " .
leonardo was a fundamentally different kind of scientist from galileo , newton and other scientists who followed him in that , as a renaissance man , his theorising and hypothesising integrated the arts and particularly painting .
as an artist , he quickly became master of " topographic anatomy " , drawing many studies of muscles , tendons and other visible anatomical features .
leonardo was given permission to dissect human corpses at the hospital of santa maria nuova in florence and later at hospitals in milan and rome .
the project was left unfinished at the time of melzi 's death more than 50 years later .
during the time melzi was ordering the material into chapters for publication , they were examined by a number of anatomists and artists , including vasari , cellini and albrecht durer , who made a number of drawings from them .
he studied the mechanical functions of the skeleton and muscular forces that are applied to it in a manner that prefigured the modern science of biomechanics .
he drew the heart and vascular system , the sex organs and other internal organs , making one of the first scientific drawings of a fetus " in utero " .
the drawings and notation are far ahead of their time , and if published would undoubtedly have made a major contribution to medical science .
he created models of the cerebral ventricles with the use of melted wax and constructed a glass aorta to observe the circulation of blood through the aortic valve by using water and grass seed to watch flow patterns .
vesalius published his work on anatomy and physiology in " de humani corporis fabrica " in 1543 .
leonardo was valued as an engineer .
in a letter to ludovico il moro , he wrote that he could create all sorts of machines both for the protection of a city and for siege .
in 1502 , he created a plan for diverting the flow of the arno river , a project on which niccolo machiavelli also worked .
the bridge was meant to span an inlet at the mouth of the bosporus known as the golden horn .
leonardo was fascinated by the phenomenon of flight for much of his life , producing many studies , including " codex on the flight of birds " — 1505dilly , as well as plans for several flying machines such as a flapping ornithopter and a machine with a helical rotor .
the british television station channel four commissioned a 2003 documentary , " leonardo 's dream machines " , in which various designs by leonardo , such as a parachute and a giant crossbow , were interpreted , constructed and tested .
leonardo was famous for his death , and was claimed to have supported him in his old age and held him in his arms as he died .
crowds still queue to see his best-known artworks , t-shirts still bear his most famous drawing , and writers continue to hail him as a genius while speculating about his private life , as well as about what one so intelligent actually believed in .
. . another of the greatest painters in this world looks down on this art in which he is unequalled .
in the 19th century , leonardo liked leonardo 's genius , causing him to be interested in the work : " such was the dawn of modern art , when leonardo da vinci broke forth with a splendour that distanced former excellence : made up of all the elements that constitute the essence of all the geniuses : " this is echoed by a . . . . . . the other artists who illustrated the world through the towered by the towered by the tower .
hippolyte taine wrote in 1866 : " there may not be in the world an example of another genius so universal , so incapable of fulfilment , so full of yearning for the infinite , so naturally refined , so far ahead of his own century and the following centuries . "
art historian bernard berenson wrote in 1896 : " leonardo is the one artist of whom it may be said with perfect literalness : nothing that he touched but turned into a thing of eternal beauty .
he had his feeling for line and for light and shade , forever transmuted it into life-communicating values . "
liana bortolon , writing in 1967 , said : " because of the multiplicity of interests that spurred him to pursue every field of knowledge .
. . leonardo can be considered , quite rightly , to have been the universal genius par excellence , and with all the disquieting overtones inherent in that term .
he studied the personal notes , sketches , budget notations , and musings of the man whom he considers the greatest of innovators .
isaacson was surprised to discover a " fun , joyous " side of leonardo in addition to his limitless curiosity and creative genius .
much of the collegiate church of saint florentin , where leonardo was buried , was damaged during the french revolution .
while excavating the site in 1863 , fine-arts inspector general arsene houssaye found a partially complete skeleton with a bronze ring on one finger , some white hair , and stone fragments bearing the inscriptions " eo " , " ar " , " dus " , and " vinc " .
a silver shield found near the bones shows a beardless francis i , corresponding to the king 's appearance during leonardo 's lifetime , and the skull 's inclusion of eight teeth corresponds to someone of approximately the appropriate age .
the remains , except for the ring and a lock of hair which houssaye kept , were brought to paris in a lead box .
a plaque above the tomb says that the remains are of leonardo .
it has since been theorized that the folding of the skeleton 's right arm over the head may correspond to the paralysis of leonardo 's right hand .
in 2016 , it was announced that dna tests will be conducted to determine whether the attribution is correct .
salvator mundi " , a painting by leonardo depicting jesus holding an orb , sold for us $ 450.3 million at a christie 's auction in new york , 15 november 2017 .
the highest price ever paid for a work of art at auction was for pablo picasso 's " les femmes d ' alger " , which sold for us $ 179.4 million in may 2015 at christie 's new york .