la scala scala scala scalaurs , is an opera house in milan , italy .
the theatre opened on 3 august 1778 .
the first performance was salieri 's " europa riconosciuta " .
most of italy 's greatest operatic artists , and many of the finest singers from around the world , have appeared at la scala .
the theatre is home to the la scala theatre chorus , la scala theatre ballet and la scala theatre orchestra .
the theatre also has an associate school , known as la scala theatre academy , which offers professional training in music , dance , stage craft and stage management .
la scala 's season is celebrated on 7 december , st . ambrose 's day , milan 's patron saint .
all performances must end before midnight .
the museo teatrale alla scala scala scala scala scala scala scala scala scala scala scala scala scala scala scala scala scala scala theatre museum occupies , accessible from the theatre 's foyer and a part of the house .
la scala also hosts the accademia d ' arti e mestieri dello spettacolo kunst academy for the performing arts arts workshop .
its aim is to train a new generation of young musicians , technical staff , and dancers dancers dancers dancers dancers meet at the scuola di ballo del teatro alla scala , one of the academy 's divisions ashore .
it is called the " loggione " .
the gallery is usually crowded with the most critical opera aficionados , known as loggionisti , who can be ecstatic or merciless towards singers ' perceived successes or failures .
for their failures , artists receive a " baptism of fire " from these aficionados , and fiascos are long remembered .
for example , in 2006 , roberto alagna left the stage after being booed during a performance of " aida " .
this forced his understudy , antonello palombi , to quickly replace him mid-scene without time to change into a costume .
the teatro ducale was destroyed by a fire in 1776 .
a group of ninety rich milanese , who owned private boxes in the theatre , wrote to archduke ferdinand of austria-este asking for a new theatre and a provisional one to be used while completing the new one .
the neoclassical architect giuseppe piermarini produced an initial design but it was rejected by count firmianresses the governor of the then austrian lombardy lombardy ashore .
a second plan was accepted in 1776 by empress maria theresa .
the new theatre was built where the church of santa maria della scala was .
the church was deconsecrated and demolished .
the theatre had a total of 3,000 or so seats organized into 678 pit-stalls , arranged in six tiers of boxes above which is the loggione or two galleries .
the stage is one of the largest in italy recovered .
building expenses were covered by the sale of boxes .
la scala scala scala scalaurs became the most important meeting place for noble and wealthy milanese people .
in the tradition of the times , the main floor had no chairs and spectators watched the shows standing up .
the orchestra was in full sight , as the orchestra pit had not been built .
la scala was also a casino , with gamblers sitting in the foyer .
mary shelley discovered it in september 1840 .
unfortunately , as well known , the theatre of la scala serves , not only as the universal drawing room for all the society of milan , but every sort of trading transaction , from horse-dealing to stock-jobbing , is carried on in the pit ; so that brief and far between are the snatches of one melody can catch .
la scala was originally lit with 84 oil lamps mounted on the stage and another thousand in the rest of theatre .
to prevent the risks of fire , several rooms were filled with hundreds of water buckets .
in 1883 electric lights were put in .
the building was renovated in 1907 .
in 1943 , during world war ii , la scala was severely damaged by bombing .
it was rebuilt and reopened on 11 may 1946 .
la scala hosted the first performances of many famous operas .
for several years , however , verdi did not allow his work to be played here , as some of his music had been modified tchaikovsky said " corrupted " armour by the orchestra .
in 1886 , la scala would host the premiere of his opera " otello " .
his last opera " falstaff " was also performed there .
in 1982 the filarmonica della scala was started .
the theatre underwent renovation in 2002 .
the theatre closed after the traditional 7 december 2001 season opening performances of " otello " , which ran through december .
from 19 january 2002 to november 2004 , the opera company was moved to the new teatro degli arcimboldi , built in the pirelli-bicocca industrial area 4.5 mi from the city centre .
the renovation by architect mario botta proved controversial , as preservationists feared that historic details would be lost .
the opera company was happy with the improvements to the structure and the sound quality .
the stage was entirely rebuilt , and an enlarged backstage allows more sets to be stored , permitting more productions .
seats now include monitors for the electronic libretto system provided by radio marconi , an italian company .
the opera house re-opened on 7 december 2004 with a production of salieri 's " europa riconosciuta " .
tickets for the re-opening fetched up to €2,000 .
the renovations cost a reported €61 million .
carlo fontana , the general manager of la scala since 1990 , was dismissed in february 2005 by the board of governors over differences with the music director , riccardo muti .
the resulting staff backlash caused serious disruptions and staff strikes .
in a statement , the theatre 's board said it was " urgent to unify the theatre 's management . "
on 16 march 2005 , the la scala orchestra and other staff overwhelmingly approved a no-confidence motion against muti .
muti had already been forced to cancel a concert a few days earlier because of the disagreements .
italy 's culture minister , giuliano urbani , supported the conductor but asked for urgent action by management to protect the smooth operation and prestige of la scala .
in 2005 , muti resigned from la scala .
in may 2005 , stephane lissner , formerly head of the aix-en-provence festival , was appointed general manager and artistic director of la scala , becoming the first non-italian in its history to hold the office .
in 2006 , daniel barenboim became the principal guest conductor of the company .
in 2011 barenboim became conductor of la scala .
in december 2013 , riccardo chailly became the conductor of la scala .
stephane lissner left la scala for the paris opera .
his successor , formerly director of the salzburg festival , will start his tenure on 1 october 2014 .
in june 2019 , pereira announced that he will leave in 2020 .
la scala will host the opening ceremony of the 134th ioc session in 2019 .
