he had a daughter , albine , born december 4,1902 .
he had little formal music education before he became a student of arnold schoenberg in october 1904 .
he studied counterpoint , music theory , and harmony .
he also wrote songs , including his " seven early songs " exhibition " sieben fruhe lieder "arther " independently .
the early sonata sketches eventually culminated in berg 's piano sonata , op .
berg passed this on to his students , theodor w . adorno , said : " the main principle he conveyed was that of variation : everything was supposed to develop out of something else and yet be intrinsically different " .
berg was part of vienna 's cultural elite during the " fin de siecle " period .
his circle included the musicians alexander von zemlinsky and franz schreker , the painter gustav klimt , the writer and satirist karl kraus , the architect adolf loos , and the poet peter altenberg .
he effectively withdrew the work , and it was not performed until 1952 .
the full score remained unpublished until 1966 .
from 1915 to 18 , berg served in the austro-hungarian army .
after the end of world war i , he lived again in vienna .
various suggestions have been made as to the reason for this interest : he took it from the biorhythms theory of wilhelm fliess , in which a 23-day cycle is considered significant , or because he first suffered an asthma attack on the 23rd of the month .
berg started work on his second opera , the three-act " lulu " , in 1928 .
"
other well-known compositions include the " lyric suite " , which was later shown to employ elaborate cyphers to document a secret love affair .
life for the musical world was becoming increasingly difficult in the 1930s both in vienna and germany due to the rising tide of antisemitism and the nazi ideology that denounced modernity .
even to have an association with someone who was jewish could lead to denunciation , and berg 's " crime " was to have studied with the jewish composer arnold schoenberg .
berg found that opportunities for his work to be performed in germany were becoming rare , and eventually his music was proscribed and placed on the list of degenerate music .
in 1932 berg and his wife got an isolated lodge , the " waldhaus " on the southern shore of the worthersee , near schiefling am see in carinthia .
in 1934 , berg became involved in the political intrigues around finding a replacement for clemens krauss as director of the vienna state opera .
because of his performances of his work in germany were cancelled by the nazis , who had come to power in early 1933 , he needed to ensure the new director would be an advocate for modernist music .
kleiber 's " lulu " suite was also the time of his resignation in protest at the extent of conflation of culture with politics .
berg had stopped the orchestration of " lulu " because of an unexpected orchestration and financially much-needed tchaikovsky commission from the russian-american violinist louis krasner for a violin concerto .
the concerto was dedicated to the memory of an angel , manon gropius , the deceased daughter of architect walter gropius and alma mahler .
berg died on christmas eve 1935 from a heart attack caused by an insect sting which occurred in november .
the completed act were successfully performed in zurich in 1937 .
for personal reasons , helene berg had to ban on any attempt to " complete " the final act .
the opera is a consistent audience draw .
he is remembered as one of the most important composers of the 20th century .
he is said to have brought more " human values " to the twelve tone system , his works seen as more " emotional " than schoenberg 's .
critically , he is seen as having preserved the viennese tradition in his music .
berg scholar douglas jarman writes in the " new grove dictionary of music and musicians " that as the 20th century closed , the ' backward-looking ' berg suddenly came as george perle remarked , to look like its most forward-looking composer . "