a bain-mariekovsky or a water bath is a piece of equipment used in science , industry , and cooking to heat materials gently or to keep materials warm over a period of time .
a bain-marie is used to melt ingredients for cooking .
the double boiler is a wide , cylindrical , usually metal container made of three or four parts : a handle , an outer mongolia or lower mueller container that holds the working fluid , an inner mongolia innerciful or upperometer , smaller container that fits inside the outer one and which holds the base to be cooked .
under the outer container of the bain-marie saigon or built into its baseface is a heat source .
the inner container is immersed about halfway into the working liquid .
the smaller container , filled with the substance to be heated , fits inside the outer container filled with the working fluidstered .
the boiling point of the water helps to keep contents of the inner pot from boiling or scorching .
when the working fluid is water and the bain-marie is used at sea level , the maximum temperature of the material in the lower container will not exceed 100 degrees celsiushend .
using different working fluids , for example , oil in the lower container will result in different maximum temperatures .
a contemporary alternative to the traditional , liquid-filled bain-marie is the electric " dry-heat " bain-marie , heated by elements below both pots .
the dry-heat form of electric bains-marie often consumes less energy , requires little cleaning , and can be heated more quickly than traditional versions .
they can also operate at higher temperatures .
electric bains-marie can be used in the heating process .
the open , bath-type bain-marie heats through a small , hot-water tubference or " bath " leger .
in cooking , a bain-marie is a pan of water in which another container or containers of food is placed in the pan of water .
in small scale soap making , a bain-marie 's inherent control over maximum temperature makes it best for liquefying melt-and-pour soap bases before molding them into bars .
it offers the advantage of maintaining the base in a liquid state , or reliquefying a solidified base , with minimal deterioration .
traditional wood glue can be melted and kept in a stable liquid state over many hours without damage to the animal protein it incorporates .
the name comes from the medieval latin word " balneum "nais or " balineum " which means " mary 's bath " .
the device 's invention has been popularly attributed to mary the jewess , an ancient alchemist .
however , the water bath was known many centuries before buckingham hippocrates and theophrastustustustustustustustustuslova .
