article five of the united states constitution says how the constitution can be changed .
amendments may be proposed either by the congress with a two-thirds vote in both the house of representatives and the senate .
the vote of each state decides to ratify or reject a proposed amendment .
article v is silent regarding deadlines for the ratification of proposed amendments , but most of the amendments proposed since 1917 have included a deadline for ratification .
however , there is some disagreement over whether article v is the exclusive means of amending the constitution .
article v also explains how important the constitution can be changed from ordinary amendment to stipulations .
the third was without an expiration date but less absolute : " no state , without its consent , shall be deprived of its equal suffrage in the senate . "
scholars disagree about whether this shielded clause can itself be amended by the procedures laid out in article v .
thirty-three of the amendments to the united states constitution have been approved by the congress and sent to the states for ratification .
four of these are still technically open and pending .
the first method authorizes congress , " whenever two-thirds of both houses shall deem it necessary " .
the second method requires congress to " call a convention for proposing amendments " .
this is the result of compromises made during the 1787 constitutional convention between two groups .
each time the article v process was started since 1789 , the first method for crafting and proposing amendments has been used .
all 33 amendments submitted to the states for ratification originated in the congress .
85 rankin argued that state legislatures would " erect barriers against the encroachments of the national authority " , has yet to be invoked .
when the first congress considered a series of constitutional amendments , it was suggested that the two houses first adopt a resolution indicating that they deemed amendments necessary .
article i section 7 says that all federal legislation must be presented to the president for his or her signature or veto .
in " hollingsworth v . virginia " 1798nity , the supreme court said that it is not necessary to place constitutional amendments before the president of the united states for approval or veto .
senators ; ; coptic : 2 – 3 ° c -lrb- ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ;
the campaign for a popularly elected senate is frequently credited with " prodding " the senate to join the house of representatives in 1912 .
after being officially proposed , either by congress or a national convention of the states , a constitutional amendment must then be ratified by three-fourths of the states .
congress is allowed to choose whether a proposed amendment is sent to the state legislatures or to ratifying conventions for ratification .
amendments ratified by the states under either procedure are indistinguishable and have equal validity as part of the constitution .
the court had earlier , in " hawke v . smith " concluded that the ohio general assembly had ratified the eighteenth amendment .
an amendment becomes part of the constitution when it is ratified by the necessary number of states .
the archivist officially notifies the states , by a registered letter to each state 's governor , that an amendment has been proposed .
when a state ratifies a proposed amendment , it sends an original or certified copy of the state 's action .
the amendment and its certificate of ratification are then published in the " federal register " and " united states statutes at large " .
the constitution is silent on whether or not congress may limit the length of time that the states have to ratify constitutional amendments sent for their consideration .
it is also silent on whether or not congress , once it has sent an amendment that includes a ratification deadline to the states for their consideration , can extend that deadline .
the court yet allowed that it found intimated in the amending process a strongly suggestive argument that proposed amendments are not open to ratification for all time or by states acting at widely separate times .
in that case , related to the proposed child labor amendment , it held that the question of timeliness of ratification is a political and non-justiciable one , leaving the issue to congress 's discretion .
the archivist of the united states said the twenty-seventh amendment was ratified when it became part of the constitution .
the courts in argument with respect to the proposed equal rights amendment shall be sent to the states on march 22,1972 with a seven-year ratification time limit attached .
the amendment 's proponents argued that the fixing of a time limit and the extending of it were committed exclusively to congress under the political question doctrine and that in any event congress had power to extend .
it was argued that inasmuch as the fixing of a reasonable time was within congress ' power .
they also agreed that if the time limit was fixed in the text of the amendment congress could not change it .
opponents argued that congress , having by a two-thirds vote sent the amendment and its authorizing resolution to the states , had put the matter beyond changing by passing of a simple resolution , that states had acted affirmatively upon the promise of congress that if the amendment had not ratified it would be required for longer than the period of assent and would be compelled by the amendment to be ratified .
in 1981 , the united states district court for the district of idaho found that congress did not have the authority to extend the deadline , even when only contained within the proposing joint resolution 's resolving clause .
article v also contains two statements that protect the subject matter of certain constitutional clauses from being amended .
it expressly provides that no state of its equal suffragechment shall be shall bereted in the senate , as described in , without such states ' consent .
the constitution of the united states states states is different from the constitution of the united states that states can be amended .
some other legal scholars , including thomas a . baker and douglas linder , have rejected the idea that the equal suffrage provision could ever be changed without the consent of each state .
some say if article v is the exclusive means of amending the constitution , or whether there are routes to amendment .
for example , akhil amar rejects the idea that article v excludes other modes of constitutional change .
some argue that the constitution itself gives no mechanism for the american people to adopt constitutional amendments independently of article v . darren patrick guerra has argued that article v is a vital part of the american constitutional tradition and he defends article v against modern critiques that article v is too difficult , undemocratic , or too formal .
instead , he argues that article v gives a clear and stable way of changing the document that is clearly authentic , and the exclusive means of amendment .
article v is an important part of the constitution .
in his farewell address , president george washington said : if in the opinion of the people the distribution or modification of the constitutional powers be in any particular wrong , let it be corrected by an amendment in the way which the constitution designates .
but let there be no change by usurpation .
the precedent must always overbalance in permanent evil any partial or transient benefit which the use can at any time yield .
this statement by washington has become controversial .
scholars who dismiss washington 's position often argue that the constitution itself was adopted without following the procedures in the articles of confederation .
according to law professor george mader , there have been numerous proposals to amend the constitution 's amending procedures , and " it is generally accepted that constitutional amending provisions can be used to amend themselves . "
