no candidate won a majority of the electoral vote .
adams was elected president by the house on february 9,1825 .
it was the first election in which the winner did not achieve at least a majority of the national popular vote .
senator andrew jackson , house speaker henry clay , and secretary of state adams all joined crawford in seeking the presidency .
adams won new england , jackson and adams split the mid-atlantic states , jackson and clay split the western states , and jackson and crawford split the southern states .
clay was influential within the contingent election , and threw his support behind adams , who shared many of his positions on the major issues .
the era of good feelings associated with the administration of president james monroe was a time of less emphasis on political party identity .
with the federalists discredited , democratic-republicans adopted some key federalist economic programs and institutions .
the economic nationalism of the era of good feelings that would authorize the tariff of 1816 and incorporate the second bank of the united states .
because of the wide single-party identification , there was no need to be a party discipline .
rather than political harmony , factions of the party were created .
the first president of the united states , andrew jackson , took command of the confederate army .
only house speaker henry clay of kentucky held political power independent of monroe .
the sectional disputes over slavery expansion raised tensions , and both events plus other factors made the demand for increased democratic control .
the previous competition between the federalist party and the democratic-republican party collapsed after the war of 1812 .
monroe was the democratic-republican candidate for president in 1820 .
monroe declined to seek re-nomination for a third term .
vice president daniel d . tompkins was considered unflated due to his unpopularity and major health problems .
the presidential nomination was thus left wide open within the democratic-republican party , the only major national political entity in the united states .
gallatin was also dissatisfied with repeated attacks on his credibility made by the other candidates .
he was replaced by the late north carolina senator nathaniel macon .
however , jackson was not one to decline such a request .
jackson had geographically the largest support , though there were strong numbers in his home state of tennessee and in pennsylvania and populous areas where even he ran poorly .
policy played a reduced role in the election , though positions on tariffs and internal improvements did create significant disagreements .
in reality , calhoun was vehemently opposed to nearly all of adams ' policies , but he did nothing to dissuade adams supporters from voting for him for vice president .
contrafacta , or well known songs and tunes whose lyrics have been changed , were used to promote political agendas and presidential candidates .
contrafacta such as this one , which promoted andrew jackson as a national hero , have been a long-standing tradition in presidential elections .
john c . calhoun was one of the candidates who helped write the newspaper " the patriot " .
instead it was left to volunteer citizens and partisans to speak on their behalf .
the electoral map confirmed the candidates ' sectional support , with adams winning in new england , jackson having wide voter appeal , clay attracting votes from the west , and crawford attracting votes from the eastern south .
with no electoral majority , a contingent election was held in the u . s . house of representatives .
the top three candidates by electoral votes were admitted as candidates in the house : andrew jackson , john quincy adams , and william crawford .
clay detested jackson and said of him , " i shall believe that killing 2,500 englishmen at new orleans qualifies for the various , difficult , and complicated duties of the chief magistracy . "
clay 's policy differences with crawford were even deeper , especially on matters of the tariff as well as crawford 's known ill health issues .
clay would use his political influence in the house to motivate house house delegations in states where he had won at least a voting majority to vote for adams .
adams ' victory shocked jackson , who , as the winner of a plurality of both the popular and electoral votes , expected the house to choose him .
not long before the contingent house election , an anonymous statement appeared in a philadelphia paper , called the " columbian observer " .
the statement states that clay of the secretary of state was the reason he sold adams 's support .
no formal investigation was conducted , so the matter was not confirmed nor denied .
when adams was victorious , he chose to accept and continue to support the administration he voted for .
by appointing clay his secretary of state , president adams essentially declared him heir to the presidency , as adams and his three predecessors had all served as secretary of state .
the jacksonians would campaign on this claim for the next four years .