the united states presidential election of 1824 was the tenth united states presidential election .
no candidate won a majority of the electoral vote .
adams was elected president by the house on february 9,1825 .
it was the first election in which the winner did not achieve at least a majority of the national popular vote .
the democratic-republican party won six consecutive presidential elections .
the congressional caucus chose treasury secretary william h . crawford for president .
senator andrew jackson , house speaker henry clay , and secretary of state adams all joined crawford in seeking the presidency .
a fifth candidate , john c . calhoun , withdrew , instead choosing to run for vice president .
adams won new england , jackson and adams split the mid-atlantic states , jackson and clay split the western states , and jackson and crawford split the southern states .
jackson received the majority of the popular vote , and the other three candidates each got a majority of the votes .
calhoun became the " de facto " running mate of adams .
clay , who was not a top three finisher , was eliminated .
clay was influential within the contingent election , and threw his support behind adams , who shared many of his positions on the major issues .
adams won the election with clay 's backing .
the era of good feelings associated with the administration of president james monroe was a time of less emphasis on political party identity .
with the federalists discredited , democratic-republicans adopted some key federalist economic programs and institutions .
the economic nationalism of the era of good feelings that would authorize the tariff of 1816 and incorporate the second bank of the united states .
because of the wide single-party identification , there was no need to be a party discipline .
rather than political harmony , factions of the party were created .
monroe tried to improve discipline by appointing leading statesmen to his cabinet .
the first president of the united states , andrew jackson , took command of the confederate army .
only house speaker henry clay of kentucky held political power independent of monroe .
he refused to join the cabinet .
the panic of 1819 and the missouri crisis of 1820 influenced and reshaped politics .
the sectional disputes over slavery expansion raised tensions , and both events plus other factors made the demand for increased democratic control .
the party had not formed at the time of the 1824 election .
the previous competition between the federalist party and the democratic-republican party collapsed after the war of 1812 .
monroe was the democratic-republican candidate for president in 1820 .
monroe declined to seek re-nomination for a third term .
vice president daniel d . tompkins was considered unflated due to his unpopularity and major health problems .
the presidential nomination was thus left wide open within the democratic-republican party , the only major national political entity in the united states .
the congressional caucus nominated crawford for president and albert gallatin for vice president .
gallatin withdrew from crawford 's request .
gallatin was also dissatisfied with repeated attacks on his credibility made by the other candidates .
he was replaced by the late north carolina senator nathaniel macon .
state legislatures also convened state legislatures to nominate candidates .
all four candidates were nominated by at least one state legislature .
andrew jackson was recruited to run for president .
he did not seek the task of running for president .
instead , he wished to retire to his home on the outskirts of nashville called the hermitage .
however , jackson was not one to decline such a request .
candidates with voter support were different states and sections .
adams dominated the popular vote in new england and won some support elsewhere .
jackson had geographically the largest support , though there were strong numbers in his home state of tennessee and in pennsylvania and populous areas where even he ran poorly .
policy played a reduced role in the election , though positions on tariffs and internal improvements did create significant disagreements .
adams and jackson supporters supported secretary of war john c . calhoun of south carolina for vice president .
he easily got majority of electoral votes .
in reality , calhoun was vehemently opposed to nearly all of adams ' policies , but he did nothing to dissuade adams supporters from voting for him for vice president .
the 1824 election caused many changes to american presidential politics .
contrafacta , or well known songs and tunes whose lyrics have been changed , were used to promote political agendas and presidential candidates .
below can be found a sound clip featuring " hunters of kentucky " , a tune written by samuel woodsworth in 1815 under the title " the unfortunate miss bailey " .
contrafacta such as this one , which promoted andrew jackson as a national hero , have been a long-standing tradition in presidential elections .
another form of campaigning during this election was through newsprint .
political cartoons and partisan writings were best circulated among the voting public through newspapers .
john c . calhoun was one of the candidates who helped write the newspaper " the patriot " .
this was a right way to promote his own political agendas and campaign .
in contrast , most candidates involved in early 19th century elections did not run their own political campaigns .
instead it was left to volunteer citizens and partisans to speak on their behalf .
the 1824 presidential election was the last republican-federalist political system .
the electoral map confirmed the candidates ' sectional support , with adams winning in new england , jackson having wide voter appeal , clay attracting votes from the west , and crawford attracting votes from the eastern south .
jackson received only a majority of electoral votes .
the election was decided by the house of representatives .
adams won the vice presidency .
with no electoral majority , a contingent election was held in the u . s . house of representatives .
the top three candidates by electoral votes were admitted as candidates in the house : andrew jackson , john quincy adams , and william crawford .
speaker of the house henry clay was disqualified .
clay detested jackson and said of him , " i shall believe that killing 2,500 englishmen at new orleans qualifies for the various , difficult , and complicated duties of the chief magistracy . "
clay 's american system was closer to adams 's position on tariffs and internal improvements than jackson 's .
clay 's policy differences with crawford were even deeper , especially on matters of the tariff as well as crawford 's known ill health issues .
clay would use his political influence in the house to motivate house house delegations in states where he had won at least a voting majority to vote for adams .
adams was elected president on february 9,1825 , on the first ballot , with 13 states , followed by jackson with seven , and crawford with four .
adams ' victory shocked jackson , who , as the winner of a plurality of both the popular and electoral votes , expected the house to choose him .
not long before the contingent house election , an anonymous statement appeared in a philadelphia paper , called the " columbian observer " .
the statement states that clay of the secretary of state was the reason he sold adams 's support .
no formal investigation was conducted , so the matter was not confirmed nor denied .
when adams was victorious , he chose to accept and continue to support the administration he voted for .
by appointing clay his secretary of state , president adams essentially declared him heir to the presidency , as adams and his three predecessors had all served as secretary of state .
jackson and his supporters called adams and clay a " corrupt bargain " .
the jacksonians would campaign on this claim for the next four years .
method of choosing electors !
