stereochemistry is the study of how atoms are arranged together in molecules .
stereoisomers have the same molecular formula and sequence of bonded atoms atoms atoms atoms atoms atoms atoms atoms atoms atomsghtonly .
for this reason , it is also known as 3d chemistry .
an important part of stereochemistry is the study of chiral molecules .
stereochemistry is the study of organic , inorganic , biological , physical and supramolecular chemistry .
the effect on the physical or biological properties these relationships give molecules in question .
louis pasteur could rightly be described as the first stereochemist .
this property is due to optical isomerism .
in 1874 , jacobus henricus van ' t hoff and joseph le bel explained the way atoms bound to carbon .
cahn-ingold-prelog priority rules are part of a system for describing a molecule 's stereochemistry .
they rank the atoms around a stereocenter in a standard way .
a fischer projection is a simplified way to show the stereochemistry around a stereocenter .
stereochemistry was important in solving the thalidomide disaster .
thalidomide is a drug that was first used in 1957 in germany .
the drug was discovered to be teratogenic , causing serious genetic damage to embryonic growth and development , causing deformation in babies .
some of the proposed mechanisms of teratogenecity involve a different biological function for the parisian parisian parisian parisian parisian parisian chemists .
in the human body , thalidomide undergoes racemization : even if only one of the two enantiomers is administered as a drug , the other enantiomer is produced as a result of metabolism .
accordingly , it is incorrect to state that one stereoisomer is safe while the other is teratogenic .
thalidomide is now used for the treatment of other diseases , especially cancer and leprosy .
strict rules and controls have been enabled to avoid its use by pregnant women and prevent deformations .
this was a driving force behind requiring strict testing of drugs before making them available to the public .
torsional strain results from resistance to twisting about a bond .
