Kwanzaa is a celebration held in the United States and in other nations of the African diaspora in the Americas and lasts a week.
American Black Power activist and secular humanist Maulana Karenga, also known as Ronald McKinley Everett, created Kwanzaa in 1966, as a specifically African-American holiday, in a spirit comparable to Juneteenth.
The choice of Swahili, an East African language, reflects its status as a symbol of Pan-Africanism, especially in the 1960s, although most of the Atlantic slave trade that brought African people to America originated in West Africa.
First fruits festivals exist in Southern Africa, celebrated in December/January with the southern solstice, and Karenga was partly inspired by an account he read of the Zulu festival Umkhosi Wokweshwama.
Karenga established it to help African Americans reconnect with their African cultural and historical heritage by uniting in meditation and study of African traditions and "Nguzo Saba", the "seven principles of African Heritage", which Karenga said "is a communitarian African philosophy".
For Karenga, a major figure in the Black Power movement of the 1960s and 1970s, the creation of such holidays also underscored an essential premise "you must have a cultural revolution before the violent revolution.
During the early years of Kwanzaa, Karenga said it was meant to be an alternative to Christmas.
As Kwanzaa gained mainstream adherents, Karenga altered his position so practicing Christians would not be alienated, then stating in the 1997 "Kwanzaa: A Celebration of Family, Community, and Culture", "Kwanzaa was not created to give people an alternative to their own religion or religious holiday."
Kwanzaa celebrates what its founder called the seven principles of Kwanzaa, or "Nguzo Saba" (originally "Nguzu Saba" – the seven principles of African Heritage), which Karenga said "is a communitarian African philosophy," consisting of what Karenga called "the best of African thought and practice in constant exchange with the world."
Supplemental representations include a Nguzo Saba poster, the black, red, and green "bendera" (flag), and African books and artworks – all to represent values and concepts reflective of African culture and contribution to community building and reinforcement.
Ears of corn represent the children celebrating and corn may be part of the holiday meal.
Families celebrating Kwanzaa decorate their households with objects of art, colorful African cloth such as kente, especially the wearing of kaftans by women, and fresh fruits that represent African idealism.
It is customary to include children in Kwanzaa ceremonies and to give respect and gratitude to ancestors.
Libations are shared, generally with a common chalice, "Kikombe cha Umoja", passed around to all celebrants.
A Kwanzaa ceremony may include drumming and musical selections, libations, a reading of the African Pledge and the Principles of Blackness, reflection on the Pan-African colors, a discussion of the African principle of the day or a chapter in African history, a candle-lighting ritual, artistic performance, and, finally, a feast (karamu).
At first, observers of Kwanzaa avoided the mixing of the holiday or its symbols, values, and practice with other holidays, as doing so would violate the principle of "kujichagulia" (self-determination) and thus violate the integrity of the holiday, which is partially intended as a reclamation of important African values.
Today, many African American families celebrate Kwanzaa along with Christmas and New Year's.
Frequently, both Christmas trees and kinaras, the traditional candle holder symbolic of African American roots, share space in Kwanzaa-celebrating households.
For people who celebrate both holidays, Kwanzaa is an opportunity to incorporate elements of their particular ethnic heritage into holiday observances and celebrations of Christmas.
Cultural exhibitions include the Spirit of Kwanzaa, an annual celebration held at the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts featuring interpretive dance, African dance, song and poetry.
The National Retail Federation has sponsored a marketing survey on winter holidays since 2004, and in 2015 found that 1.9% of those polled planned to celebrate Kwanzaa – about six million people.
According to University of Minnesota Professor Keith Mayes, the author of "Kwanzaa: Black Power and the Making of the African-American Holiday Tradition," the popularity within the U.S. has "leveled off" as the black power movement there has declined, and as of 2009 between 500 thousand and two million Americans celebrated Kwanzaa, or between one and five percent of African Americans.
Starting in the 1990s, the holiday became increasingly commercialized, with the first Hallmark Card being sold in 1992, and there has been concern about this damaging the holiday's values.
The holiday also saw a greater public recognition as the first Kwanzaa stamp, designed by Synthia Saint James, was issued by the United States Post Office in 1997, and in the same year Bill Clinton gave the first presidential declaration marking the holiday.
The holiday has also spread to Canada and is celebrated by Black Canadians in a similar fashion as in the United States.
According to Meštrović, post-modernists in modern society may view "real" traditions as racist, sexist or otherwise oppressive, but since living in a world where nothing is true is too terrifying to most people, "nice" and "synthetic" traditions like Kwanzaa have been created to cope with the nihilistic, individualistic modern society.
Maya Angelou narrated a documentary film about Kwanzaa, "The Black Candle", written and directed by M.K.