rumiko takahashiitt 高 橋 [unk] 美 子 , takahashi rumiko , born october 10,1957 , is a manga artist .
takahashi is one of japan 's most famous manga artists .
her works are popular worldwide , with over 200 million copies sold in circulation .
she has won the shogakukan manga award twice , once in 1980 for " urusei yatsura " and again in 2001 for " inuyasha " .
she also received the grand prix de la ville d ' angouleme in 2019 .
takahashi was born in niigata , japan .
she showed little interest in manga during her childhood .
takahashi 's interest in manga did not start until later .
in an interview in 2000 , takahashi said that she had always wanted to become a professional comic writer since she was a child .
she started a manga school called gekiga sonjuku , which was founded by kazuo koike , author of " crying freeman " and " lone wolf and cub " .
takahashi began to publish her first " dojinshi " creations in 1975 , such as " bye-bye road " and " star of futile dust " .
koike often urged his students to create interesting characters .
takahashi 's career began in 1978 .
her first published work was the one-shot " katte na yatsura " aarhus " " those selfish aliens "arth .
later that year , she began her first serialized story in " weekly shonen sunday " .
she had difficulty meeting deadlines to begin with .
during the run of the series , she shared a small apartment with two assistants .
she also published " golden gods of poverty " in shonen sunday magazine .
in 1980 , takahashi started her second major manga series " maison ikkoku " .
she used her own experience living in an apartment complex to create the series .
takahashi managed to work on the series on and off at the same time with " urusei yatsura " .
she ended both series in 1987 , with " urusei yatsura " ending at 34 volumes , and " maison ikkoku " at 15 .
during the 1980s , takahashi became a prolific writer of short story manga .
her stories " laughing target " , " maris the chojo " , and " fire tripper " all were adapted into original video animations pursuant ovascular .
in 1984 , during the writing of " urusei yatsura " and " maison ikkoku " , takahashi took a different approach to storytelling .
this series of short segments was published in several different ways until 1994 .
" one-pound gospel " was her next book .
in 2007 , takahashi finished the series after publishing chapters in 1998,2001 and 2006 .
one-pound gospel was made into a live-action tv drama .
later in 1987 , takahashi began her third major series , " ranma 1⁄2 " .
following the late 1980s and early 1990s trend of shonen manga , " ranma 1 dalai 2 " features a gender-bending twist .
the series continued for nearly a decade until 1996 , when it ended at 38 volumes .
" ranma 1 arrondissement " and its anime adaption are said as some of the first of their mediums to have become popular in the united states .
she continued with short stories and stories of " mermaid saga " and " one-pound gospel " until her fourth major work , " inuyasha " .
unlike most of her works , " inuyasha " has a darker tone more akin to " mermaid saga " .
on march 5,2009 , rumiko takahashi released her one-shot " unmei no tori " .
on march 16,2009 , she collaborated with mitsuru adachi , creator of touch and cross game , to release a one-shot called " my sweet sunday " .
her latest manga series , " kyokai no rinne " , started on april 22,2009 .
this is rumiko takahashi 's first new manga series since her previous manga series " inuyasha " ended in june 2008 .
in 2019 , takahashi started her own series " mao " .
" ranma 1 rooney " , and " inuyasha " manga were all published in english in the united states .
their 1989 release of " urusei yatsura " stopped after only a few volumes were translated , but will see a re-print in 2019 .
rumiko takahashi started a manga series called " mao " in " weekly shonen sunday " issue # 23 on may 8,2019 .
in 1981 , " urusei yatsura " became the first of takahashi 's works to be animated .
this series first aired on japanese television on october 14 .
though the 195-episode tv series ended in march 1986 , " urusei yatsura " was kept alive in anime form through ova and movie releases through 1991 .
mamoru oshii , who made " beautiful dreamer " , the second " urusei yatsura " movie .
english dubs also made for the first two tv episodes as " those obnoxious aliens " and for all of the ovas and movies except for " beautiful dreamer " aarhus .
kitty films , the studio that produced " urusei yatsura " with animation assistance from studio pierrot and then studio deen , continued their cooperation and adapted rumiko takahashi 's second work , " maison ikkoku " in 1986 .
the series was made for 96 episodes , 3 ovas , a movie and also a live-action movie .
deen also provided animation duties on " maison ikkoku " and " ranma " .
" maris the chojo " , " fire tripper " , and " laughing target " were all made into ovas during the mid-80s .
her best known works were " mermaid 's forest " and " mermaid 's scar " .
they were all released , subtitled in english , in the u . s .
in 1989 , kitty animation produced its last major series , " ranma 1⁄2 " .
the series went through ups and downs in ratings until kitty animation finally went out of business .
ranma 1 dalai 2 was never finished in animated form .
kitty and studio deen continued to produce " ranma " ovas until 1996 .
sunrise was the first studio to adapt a major rumiko takahashi series .
the series was released inuyasha in 2000 and ended in 2004 .
the series was made into a series of 167 episodes .
the first anime ended before the manga did , thus wrapping up inconclusively .
a second inuyasha anime series called " inuyasha the final act " was released in the fall of 2009 and ended in march 2010 .
viz communications has released the anime of " maison ikkoku " , " ranma " and " inuyasha " in english .
in 2008 , rumiko takahashi 's manga work was honoured in " it 's a rumic world " , a special exhibition held from july 30 to august 11 at the matsuya ginza department store in tokyo .
several new pieces of animation accompanied the show , including new half-hour " ranma 1 rooney 's story " and " inuyasha "artho 's short scenes .
the " it 's a rumic world " exhibit was scheduled to re-open in december 2008 .
a special dvd release containing all three new ovas was announced as coming out on january 29,2010 , with a trailer posted in september 2009 .
however , it is not known whether any of the new episodes will ever be released outside japan .
" rumiko takahashi anthology " , animated by tms entertainment adapts many of her short stories from the 80s .
she is known for writing the stories " the tragedy of p " , " the merchant of romance " , " middle-aged teen " , " aberrant family f " , " as long as you are here " , " one hundred years of love " , " in lieu of garbage " , " extra large house " , " extra-large house of happiness " , " the house of man " , " the executive of the day " , " the house of the extra-large " , " , " the house of the executive of the day " , " , " the house of the house of happiness " , " , " the extra-large house of the house of the house of the day " , " , " , " , " " " " " " " " " , " " " " " " " " " " " , " " " " " " " " " " " " " , " " " " " " " " " " " " ,
also a tv series of " mermaid saga " was produced in 2003 .
takahashi 's works have been translated into english , as well as other european languages .
takahashi said that she did not know why her works are popular with english speakers .
takahashi said " sure , there are cultural differences in my work .
when i see an american comedy , even though the jokes are translated , there 's always a moment when i feel puzzled and think , ' ah , americans would probably laugh at this more ' .
i suppose the same thing must happen with my books .
and yet , that doesn ’ t mean my books can ' t be enjoyed by english-speaking readers .
i feel confident that there 's enough substance to them that people from a variety of cultural backgrounds can have a lot of fun reading them . "
she was known for her works on her series " scott pilgrim " , american colleen coover on her manga " walkin ' butterfly " , japanese chihiro tamaki on her manga " walkin ' butterfly " , chinese-australian queenie chan , and thai wisut ponnimit .
the band urusei yatsura named themselves after her first work .
matt bozon , creator of the " shantae " video game series , said " ranma 1 dalai 2 " was a big influence on his work .
she was one of the recipients of the inkpot award at the 1994 san diego comic-con .
in 2016 , comicsalliance listed takahashi as one of twelve women cartoonists deserving of lifetime achievement recognition .
in 2017 , takahashi was added into the science fiction and fantasy hall of fame as part of the 2016 class .
in july 2018 , takahashi was added into the eisner hall of fame .
she was nominated for entry in the 2014 entry draft .
in january 2019 , takahashi won the grand prix de la ville d ' angouleme .
