a phenotypic trait , or character state is a distinct variant of a phenotypic characteristic of an organism .
for example , eye colour is a character of an organism , while blue , brown and hazel are " traits " .
a phenotypic trait is a trait in the cell membrane .
an example of a phenotypic trait is hair color .
underlying genes , which make up the genotype , determine the colour of the hair , but the color is the phenotype .
the phenotype is dependent on the genetic make-up of the organism .
regardless of the degree of influence of genotype versus environment , the phenotype includes all of the characteristics of an organism .
the inheritable unit that may influence a trait is called a gene .
a gene is a long and compacted string of dna and proteins .
the distance from a gene to the centromere is called the gene 's locus or map location .
the nucleus of a diploid cell has two of each chromosome .
different phenotypic traits are caused by different forms of genes , or alleles , which arise by mutation in a single individual and are passed on to successive generations .
a gene is only a dna code sequence .
alleles can be different and produce different product rnas .
combinations of different alleles go on to generate different traits through the information flow charted above .
for example , if the alleles on homologous chromosomes show a " simple dominance " relationship , the trait of the " dominant " allele shows in the phenotype .
gregor mendel pioneered the field of genetics .
his most famous analyses were based on clear-cut traits with simple dominance .
he found that the heritable units , what we now call genes , occurred in pairs .
his statistics were mainly used in statistics .
the biochemistry of the intermediate proteins determines how they interact in the cell .
biochemistry predicts how different combinations of alleles will produce varying traits .
there are many different expression patterns seen in diploid organisms .
incomplete dominance is the condition in which neither allele dominates the other in one heterozygote .
instead the phenotype is intermediate in heterozygotes .
you can tell that each gene is present in the heterozygote .
codominance refers to the alleles relationship which occurs when two alleles are both expressed in the heterozygote , and both phenotypes are seen at the same time .
multiple alleles refers to the situation when there are more than two common alleles of a gene .
blood groups in humans are a classic example .
the abo blood group proteins are important in determining the blood type in humans .
schizotypy is an example of a psychological phenotypic trait found in schizophrenia-spectrum disorders .
studies have shown that gender and age influences the expression of schizotypal traits .
for instance , certain schizotypal traits may develop further during adolescence , whereas others stay the same during this period .
