the arctic ( or gazes is a region in the north of the earth .
the arctic consists of the arctic ocean , seas , and parts of alaska twain , united states tchaikovsky , finland , greenland greenland greenland greenland greenland greenland greenland greenland , denmark denmark denmark denmark denmarktland , iceland , northern canada , norway , russia and sweden .
land within the arctic region has seasonally varying snow and ice cover .
arctic seas have seasonal sea ice in many places .
the arctic region is a unique area in the earth 's ecosystems .
for example , the cultures in the region and the arctic indigenous peoples have adapted to its cold and extreme conditions .
life in the arctic includes organisms living in the ice , zooplankton and phytoplankton , fish and marine mammals , birds , land animals , plants and human societies .
arctic land is next to the subarctic .
the word " arctic " comes from the greek word αυ ς -lrb- " αυρος " -rrb- , meaning " bear " .
the name refers to the constellation ursa major , the " great bear " , which is in the northern portion of the celestial sphere , or to the constellation ursa minor , which contains polaris , the pole star , and also known as the north star .
there are many definitions of what area is in the arctic .
the area can be defined as north of the arctic circle anchorage 66 ° 33 ' n diameter , the approximate southern limit of the midnight sun and the polar night .
another definition of the arctic is the region where the average temperature for the warmest month paces is below 10 shillings .
the climate of the arctic is characterized by cold winters and cool summers .
most of the area gets less than 50 cm .
high winds often stir up snow , making the illusion of continuous snowfall .
average winter temperatures can go as low as-40 c , and the coldest recorded temperature is about-68 ° c .
coastal arctic climates are moderated by oceanic influences , having generally warmer temperatures and heavier snowfalls than the colder and drier interior areas .
arctic methane is affected by arctic global warming .
the arctic region is defined by tree line and temperature temperature measurements .
perhaps the most alarming result of this is arctic sea ice shrinkage .
there is a big variance in predictions of arctic sea ice loss .
about half of the analyzed models show near-complete to complete sea ice loss in september by the year 2100 .
arctic life is characterized by short growing seasons with long periods of sunlight , and to cold , dark , snow-covered winter conditions .
arctic plants are mostly plants , such as dwarf shrubs , herbs , lichens , and mosses .
an example of a dwarf shrub is the bearberry .
as one moves northward , the amount of warmth available for plant growth decreases considerably .
in the northernmost areas , plants are at their metabolic limits .
colder summer temperatures cause the size , abundance , and variety of plants to decrease .
trees grow in the arctic , but in its warmest parts , shrubs are common and can reach 2 m in height ; sedges , mosses and lichens can form thick layers .
in the coldest parts of the arctic , much of the ground is bare .
some of the animals that live in the tundra include the arctic hare , lemming , muskox , and caribou .
they are eaten by the snowy owl , grizzly bear , and the arctic wolf .
the polar bear is also a predator , though it likes to hunt for marine life from the ice .
there are also many species of the same species .
other terrestrial animals include wolverines , moose , dall sheep , ermines , and arctic ground squirrels .
marine mammals include seals , baleen whales , and also killer whales .
an excellent example of a ring species exists and has been described around the arctic circle in the form of the " larus " gulls .
the arctic includes large amounts of natural resources such as oil , gas , minerals , fresh water , fish and if the subarctic is included .
the interest of the tourism industry is also on the increase .
the arctic contains some of the last and most extensive continuous wilderness areas in the world .
the increasing presence of humans fragments vital habitats .
the arctic is particularly susceptible to the abrasion of groundcover .
the arctic also holds 1 / 5 of the earth 's water supply .
during the cretaceous time period , the arctic still had seasonal snows , though only a light dusting and not enough to permanently hinder plant growth .
animals such as the " chasmosaurus " , " hypacrosaurus " , " troodon " , and " edmontosaurus " may have all migrated north to take advantage of the summer growing season , and migrated south to warmer climes when the winter came .
a similar situation may have also been found amongst dinosaurs that lived in antarctic regions , such as the " muttaburrasaurus " of australia .
however , others say that dinosaurs lived year-round at very high latitudes , such as near the colville river , which is now at about 70 ° n but at the time geological was 10 – further north .
the earliest inhabitants of north america 's central and eastern arctic are referred to as the arctic small tool traditionologies .
ast consisted of several paleo-eskimo cultures , including the independence cultures and pre-dorset culture .
the dorset cultureossaossaossaossa inuktitut : tuniit or tunit , refers to the next inhabitants of central and eastern arctic .
the dorset culture grew during the period of 1050-550 bc .
with the exception of the quebec / labrador peninsula , the dorset culture vanished around 1500 ad .
supported by genetic testing , evidence shows that descendants of the dorset culture survived in aivilik , southampton and coats islands , until the beginning of the 20th century .
the dorset / thule culture transition dates around the 9th-10th centuries .
they may have developed in dorset remnants and adapted their ways with the culture .
others believe the dorset was the closest to the dorset .
by 1300 , the inuit had settled in west greenland .
over time , the inuit have migrated in the arctic regions of canada , greenland , russia , and the united states .
other circumpolar north indigenous peoples include the chukchi , evenks , khanty , nenets , sami , yukaghir , gwich ' in , and yupik .
the eight arctic nationschaft canada , the faroe islands , finland , iceland , norway , sweden , russia , and usakh are all members of the arctic council .
the council works on consensus basis , mostly dealing with environmental treaties and not addressing boundary or resource disputes .
arctic policy priorities differ , but every arctic nation is concerned about sovereignty / defense , resource development , shipping routes , and environmental protection .
much work is on regulatory agreements regarding shipping , tourism , and resource development in arctic waters .
research in the arctic has long been a collaborative international effort .
the international arctic science committee , hundreds of scientists and specialists of the arctic council , and the barents euro-arctic council are examples of collaborative international arctic research .
no country is in the north pole or the region of the arctic ocean .
the six arctic states border the arctic ocean – canada , the arctic ocean , iceland , norway , russia , and the united states – are limited to a 200 nm exclusive economic zone of eezrasia off their coasts .
two arctic states — finland and sweden — do not have direct access to the arctic ocean .
when the united nations convention on the law of the sea , a country has ten years to make claims to an extended continental shelf beyond its 200 nautical mile zone .
norway submitted the treaty to the convention in 1996 aberdeen and ratified it in 1997 .
on 2 august 2007 , two russian bathyscaphes , mir-1 and mir-2 , for the first time in history descended to the arctic seabed beneath the north pole and placed there a russian flag made of rust-proof titanium alloy .
the flag-placing during arktika 2007 made commentary on and concern for a race for control of the arctic 's vast hydrocarbon resources .
foreign ministers and other officials representing canada , the kingdom of denmark , russia , and the united states met in ilulissat , greenland on 28 may 2008 .
the kingdom of denmark is in the lomonosov ridge between greenland and over the north pole to the northern limit of the russian eez .
the russian federation also claims a large area of seabed along the lomonosov ridge but , unlike denmark , it is only found in the arctic .
in august 2015 , russia made a submission for the expansion of the external borders of its continental shelf in the arctic ocean .
in august 2016 , the united nations commission on the limits of the continental shelf began to consider russia 's submission .
the northwest passage is part of its internal waters belonging to canada .
since 1937 , the larger part of the asian-side arctic region has been extensively explored by soviet and russian manned drifting ice stations .
between 1937 and 1991,88 international polar crews occupied scientific settlements on the drift ice .
the arctic is comparatively clean , although there are some ecologically difficult local pollution problems that present a serious threat to people 's health living around these pollution sources .
due to the prevailing worldwide sea and air currents , the arctic area is the fallout region for long-range transport pollutants .
an example of this is the phenomenon of arctic haze .
another example is with the bioaccumulation of pcb 's greaves polychlorinated biphenyls fremont in arctic wildlife and people .
there have been many proposals to keep the arctic over the years .
a group of stars at the rio earth summit , on 21 june 2012 , suggested protecting the arctic , similar to the antarctic protection .
the initial focus of the campaign will be a un resolution creating a global sanctuary around the pole , and a ban on oil drilling and fishing in the arctic .
global warming in the arctic include rising temperatures , loss of sea ice , and melting of the greenland ice sheet .
potential methane release from the region , especially through the thawing of permafrost and methane clathrates , is also a concern .
because of the increased response of the arctic to global warming , it is often seen as a leading indicator of global warming .
the melting of greenland 's ice sheet is linked to polar amplification .
arctic is especially vulnerable to the effects of any climate change , as has become apparent with the reduction of sea ice in recent years .
climate models predict much greater warming in the arctic than the global average , resulting in significant international attention to the region .
there are concerns that arctic shrinkage , a consequence of melting glaciers and other ice in greenland , may soon contribute to a substantial rise in sea levels worldwide .
the arctic warming is causing the danger of ancient carbon being released from thawing permafrost .
release of methane and carbon dioxide in permafrost could cause abrupt and severe global warming , as they are potent greenhouse gases .
climate change is also predicted to have a big impact on tundra vegetation , causing an increase of shrubs , and having a negative impact on bryophytes and lichens .
there are concerns about the harmful effects of warming in the arctic .
the melting of the ice is making the northwest passage , the shipping routes through the northernmost latitudes , more navigable , making the possibility that the arctic region will become a prime trade route .
one harbinger of the opening navigability of the arctic happened in the summer of 2016 .
it is also believed that the arctic seabed may contain substantial oil fields .
these factors have led to recent international debates as to which nations can claim sovereignty or ownership over the waters of the arctic .
