the arctic region is a unique area in the earth 's ecosystems .
for example , the cultures in the region and the arctic indigenous peoples have adapted to its cold and extreme conditions .
the name refers to the constellation ursa major , the " great bear " , which is in the northern portion of the celestial sphere , or to the constellation ursa minor , which contains polaris , the pole star , and also known as the north star .
there are many definitions of what area is in the arctic .
the area can be defined as north of the arctic circle anchorage 66 ° 33 ' n diameter , the approximate southern limit of the midnight sun and the polar night .
another definition of the arctic is the region where the average temperature for the warmest month paces is below 10 shillings .
average winter temperatures can go as low as-40 c , and the coldest recorded temperature is about-68 ° c .
coastal arctic climates are moderated by oceanic influences , having generally warmer temperatures and heavier snowfalls than the colder and drier interior areas .
perhaps the most alarming result of this is arctic sea ice shrinkage .
there is a big variance in predictions of arctic sea ice loss .
about half of the analyzed models show near-complete to complete sea ice loss in september by the year 2100 .
arctic life is characterized by short growing seasons with long periods of sunlight , and to cold , dark , snow-covered winter conditions .
as one moves northward , the amount of warmth available for plant growth decreases considerably .
in the northernmost areas , plants are at their metabolic limits .
trees grow in the arctic , but in its warmest parts , shrubs are common and can reach 2 m in height ; sedges , mosses and lichens can form thick layers .
in the coldest parts of the arctic , much of the ground is bare .
some of the animals that live in the tundra include the arctic hare , lemming , muskox , and caribou .
they are eaten by the snowy owl , grizzly bear , and the arctic wolf .
an excellent example of a ring species exists and has been described around the arctic circle in the form of the " larus " gulls .
the arctic includes large amounts of natural resources such as oil , gas , minerals , fresh water , fish and if the subarctic is included .
the interest of the tourism industry is also on the increase .
the arctic contains some of the last and most extensive continuous wilderness areas in the world .
during the cretaceous time period , the arctic still had seasonal snows , though only a light dusting and not enough to permanently hinder plant growth .
however , others say that dinosaurs lived year-round at very high latitudes , such as near the colville river , which is now at about 70 ° n but at the time geological was 10 – further north .
the earliest inhabitants of north america 's central and eastern arctic are referred to as the arctic small tool traditionologies .
the dorset cultureossaossaossaossa inuktitut : tuniit or tunit , refers to the next inhabitants of central and eastern arctic .
with the exception of the quebec / labrador peninsula , the dorset culture vanished around 1500 ad .
supported by genetic testing , evidence shows that descendants of the dorset culture survived in aivilik , southampton and coats islands , until the beginning of the 20th century .
over time , the inuit have migrated in the arctic regions of canada , greenland , russia , and the united states .
the eight arctic nationschaft canada , the faroe islands , finland , iceland , norway , sweden , russia , and usakh are all members of the arctic council .
the council works on consensus basis , mostly dealing with environmental treaties and not addressing boundary or resource disputes .
research in the arctic has long been a collaborative international effort .
no country is in the north pole or the region of the arctic ocean .
the six arctic states border the arctic ocean – canada , the arctic ocean , iceland , norway , russia , and the united states – are limited to a 200 nm exclusive economic zone of eezrasia off their coasts .
norway submitted the treaty to the convention in 1996 aberdeen and ratified it in 1997 .
on 2 august 2007 , two russian bathyscaphes , mir-1 and mir-2 , for the first time in history descended to the arctic seabed beneath the north pole and placed there a russian flag made of rust-proof titanium alloy .
foreign ministers and other officials representing canada , the kingdom of denmark , russia , and the united states met in ilulissat , greenland on 28 may 2008 .
the kingdom of denmark is in the lomonosov ridge between greenland and over the north pole to the northern limit of the russian eez .
the russian federation also claims a large area of seabed along the lomonosov ridge but , unlike denmark , it is only found in the arctic .
in august 2015 , russia made a submission for the expansion of the external borders of its continental shelf in the arctic ocean .
the northwest passage is part of its internal waters belonging to canada .
since 1937 , the larger part of the asian-side arctic region has been extensively explored by soviet and russian manned drifting ice stations .
due to the prevailing worldwide sea and air currents , the arctic area is the fallout region for long-range transport pollutants .
global warming in the arctic include rising temperatures , loss of sea ice , and melting of the greenland ice sheet .
potential methane release from the region , especially through the thawing of permafrost and methane clathrates , is also a concern .
because of the increased response of the arctic to global warming , it is often seen as a leading indicator of global warming .
arctic is especially vulnerable to the effects of any climate change , as has become apparent with the reduction of sea ice in recent years .
climate models predict much greater warming in the arctic than the global average , resulting in significant international attention to the region .
there are concerns that arctic shrinkage , a consequence of melting glaciers and other ice in greenland , may soon contribute to a substantial rise in sea levels worldwide .
release of methane and carbon dioxide in permafrost could cause abrupt and severe global warming , as they are potent greenhouse gases .
climate change is also predicted to have a big impact on tundra vegetation , causing an increase of shrubs , and having a negative impact on bryophytes and lichens .
the melting of the ice is making the northwest passage , the shipping routes through the northernmost latitudes , more navigable , making the possibility that the arctic region will become a prime trade route .
one harbinger of the opening navigability of the arctic happened in the summer of 2016 .
it is also believed that the arctic seabed may contain substantial oil fields .
these factors have led to recent international debates as to which nations can claim sovereignty or ownership over the waters of the arctic .