idiot was a legal and psychiatric category of profound intellectual disability .
it was replaced by the term " profound mental retardation " .
many political commentators , starting as early as 1856 , have interpreted the word " idiot " as reflecting the ancient greeks ' attitudes to civic participation and private life .
the term " idiot " was used for a kind of non-participants , or in a derogatory sense .
in 19th and early 20th century , an " idiot " was a person with a very profound intellectual disability .
in the early 1900s , dr . henry h . goddard proposed a classification system for intellectual disability based on the binet-simon concept of mental age .
the term " idiot " was first used to mean people having an iq below 30 iq , or intelligence quotient .
the concept of mental age has fallen into disfavor , though and iq is now based on statistical distributions .
in the obsolete medical classification , these people were said to have " profound mental retardation " or " profound mental subnormality " with iq under 20 .
until 2007 , the california penal code section 26 said that idiots were one of six types of people who are not capable of committing crimes .
in 2008 , iowa voters passed a measure replacing " idiot , or insane person " in the state 's constitution with " person adjudged mentally incompetent . "
the constitution of the state of arkansas was amended in the general election of 2008 to repeal a provisionials .
some authors use " idiot " characters in novels , plays and poetry .
the most common use of mental impairment is in edmund 's " king lear " .
in fyodor dostoevsky 's novel " the idiot " , the title refers to the central character prince myshkin , a man whose innocence , kindness and humility , combined with his occasional epileptic symptoms , cause many in the corrupt , egoistic culture around him to assume that he lacks intelligence .
in " the antichrist " , nietzsche applies the word ' idiot ' to jesus in a similar fashion , almost certainly in a allusion to dostoevsky 's use of the word : " one has to regret that no dostoevsky lived in the neighbourhood of this most interesting " decadent " ; i mean someone who could feel the fascination of the sick and the childishness of such a combination of the sick and the childishness of the sick " .
