a blizzard is a severe snowstorm .
a ground blizzard is a weather condition where snow is not falling but loose snow on the ground is lifted and blown by strong winds .
blizzards can have a very large size .
in the united states , the national weather service says that a blizzard is a severe snow storm .
a blizzard is the difference between a snowstorm and a snowstorm .
to be a blizzard , a snow storm must have sustained winds or frequent gusts that are greater than or equal to 56 km / h with blowing or drifting snow which reduces visibility to 400 m or less .
while severe cold and large amounts of drifting snow may accompany blizzards , they are not required .
blizzards can bring whiteout conditions , and can paralyze regions for days at a time , particularly where snowfall is rare .
a severe blizzard has winds over 72 km / h , near zero visibility , and temperatures of 12 c or lower .
in antarctica , blizzards are associated with winds spilling over the edge of the ice plateau at an average velocity of 160 km / h .
a blizzard is a condition where snow or ice on the ground is lifted and blown by strong winds .
the main difference between a ground blizzard and a regular blizzard is that in a ground blizzard no precipitation is produced at the time , but rather all the precipitation is already present in the form of snow or ice at the surface .
the australia bureau of meteorology says that a blizzard was " violent and very cold wind which is laden with snow , some part , at least , of which has been raised from snow covered . "
the oxford english dictionary suggests the term " blizzard " is likely onomatopoeic , derived from the same sense as " blow , blast , blister , and bluster " .
by 1859 , it was in use in the western united states .
the term became common in the press during the winter of 1880-81 .
in the united states , storm systems powerful enough to cause blizzards usually form when the jet stream dips far to the south , allowing cold , dry polar air from the north to clash with warm , humid air moving up from the south .
when cold , moist air moves eastward to the rocky mountains and the great plains , and warmer , moist air moves north from the gulf of mexico .
a blizzard may also be formed when a cold front and warm front mix together and a blizzard forms at the border line .
another storm system is when a cold core low over the hudson bay area in canada is moved southward over southeastern canada , the great lakes , and new england .
when the cold front collides with warmer air coming north from the gulf of mexico , strong surface winds , significant cold air advection , and extensive wintry precipitation occur .
low pressure systems moving out of the rocky mountains onto the great plains , a wide area of flat land , can cause thunderstorms and rain to the south and heavy snows and strong winds to the north .
with few trees or other obstructions to reduce wind and blowing , this part of the country is vulnerable to blizzards with very low temperatures and whiteout conditions .
there is no visible horizon .
people can become lost in their own front yards , when the door is only 10 ft away , and they would have to feel their way back .
motorists have to stop their cars where they are .
a nor ' easter is a large atlantic tropical cyclone that forms off the coast of the atlantic ocean .
it gets its name from the direction the wind is coming from .
some of these can form in the north atlantic ocean .
the term is most often used in the coastal areas of new england and atlantic canada .
this type of storm has characteristics similar to a hurricane .
it describes a low-pressure area whose center of rotation is just off the coast .
high storm waves may sink ships at sea .
the great blizzard of 1888 was very damaging for the united states .
it dropped 40-of snow and had sustained winds of more than 45 mph .
railroads were closed down .
it killed 400 people .
the 1972 iran blizzard was a very deadly blizzard .
it dropped as much as 26 feet of snow .
after a snowfall lasting nearly a week , an area the size of wisconsin was entirely buried in snow .
the winter of 1880 – 1881 is widely considered the most severe winter ever known in parts of the united states .
many children and their parents learned of " the snow winter " through the children 's book " the long winter " by laura ingalls wilder .
the snow arrived in october 1880 .
this made the tracks too hard , the near-starvation of the townspeople , and the courage of her future husband almanzo and another man , who came out on the open prairie of wheat that was even sure in search of a cache of wheat that was even sure .
the october blizzard brought snowfalls so deep that two-story homes had snow up to the second floor windows .
no one was prepared for the deep snow so early in the season .
by january the train service was almost entirely suspended from the region .
railroads hired many men to dig out the tracks but it was a wasted effort : as soon as they had finished shoveling a stretch of line , a new storm arrived , filling up the line and leaving their work useless .
there were no winter thaws .
in the towns the streets were filled with solid drifts to the tops of the buildings and tunneling was needed to secure passage about town .
homes and barns were completely covered .
when the snow finally melted in late spring of 1881 , huge parts of the plains were flooded .
massive ice jams broke the missouri river and when they broke the downstream areas were ravaged .
most of the town of yankton was washed away when the river overflowed its banks .
the storm of the century was a very big storm that formed over the gulf of mexico on march 12,1993 .
it is unique for its intensity , massive size and wide reaching effect .
at its height , the storm stretched from canada towards central america , but its main impact was on the united states and cuba .
the cyclone moved through the gulf of mexico , and then through the eastern united states before moving into canada .
areas as far south as northern alabama and georgia received a dusting of snow and areas such as birmingham , alabama , received up to 12 inches -lrb- 7.7 in -rrb- with hurricane-force wind gusts and record low barometric pressures .
between louisiana and cuba , hurricane-force winds produced high storm surges across northwestern florida .
in the united states , the storm was responsible for the loss of electricity to over 10 million customers .
it is said that it was directly experienced by nearly 40 percent of the country 's population at that time .
310 people died during this storm .
the storm cost $ 6 to $ 10 billion in damage .
