paolo uccello grumbled , biennial , 1397 – december 10,1475 naples , italy , was a florentine painter and mathematician .
giorgio vasari wrote that uccello was obsessed by his interest in perspective and would stay up all night in his study .
his best known works are the three paintings representing the battle of san romano , which were wrongly entitled the battle of sant ' egidio of 1416 " for a long period of time .
paolo worked in the late gothic tradition .
he had some influence on twentieth-century art and literary criticism .
uccello was born in pratovecchio in 1397 .
in 1414 uccello was a member of the painters ' guild , " compagnia di san luca " .
uccello probably left ghiberti 's workshop by the mid 1420s .
the scene was influenced by " the battle of san romano " .
vasari said that uccello ’ s first painting was a saint anthony between the saints cosmas and damianus , a commission for the hospital of lelmo .
he painted three frescoes of the life of st . francis .
in this fresco , he painted a large building with columns in perspective .
vasari said that this was a great and beautiful achievement .
as a result , this work became a model for artists who wished to craft illusions of space in order to enhance the realness of their paintings .
paolo painted " the lives of the church fathers " in the cloisters of the church of san miniato , which sat on a hill overlooking florence .
paolo then returned to finish the job only after the abbot promised him a more varied diet .
uccello was asked to paint a number of scenes of distempered animals for the house of the medici .
vasari said that he saw a fierce lion fighting with a venom-spouting snake .
in that year , he showed his artistic maturity by painting episodes of the " creation and expulsion " , which are now badly damaged , for the green cloistermind " chiostro verde "nsensense in florence .
this was difficult for many of his predecessors , so uccello also began to get a reputation for painting .
in 1425 uccello went to venice where he lived for the mosaics for the " facade of san marco " .
during this time , he also painted frescoes in the prato cathedral and bologna .
some say he visited rome with his friend donatello .
after he returned uccello stayed in florence for most of his life , executing works for churches and patrons , most notably the duomo .
despite his leave from florence , interest in uccello did not diminish .
in 1432 , the office of works asked the florentine ambassador in venice to enquire .
the condottiere and his horse are shown as if the fresco was a sculpture seen from below .
he is probably the author of the frescoes " stories of the virgin " and " story of st stephen " in the cappella dell ' assunta , florence .
later , in 1443 , he painted the figures on the clock of the duomo .
back in florence in 1446 , he painted the " green stations of the cross " , again for the cloister of the church santa maria novella .
around the mid-1450s , he painted his three most famous paintings .
the extraordinarily foreshortened forms extending in many planes accentuate uccello 's virtuosity as a draftsman , and provides a controlled visual structure to the chaos of the battle scene .
her style and her skill is a mystery as none of her work is still extant .
uccello 's predella is composed of six scenes from the myth of host desecration .
it has been suggested that the subject of the main panel , on which duke frederick of montefeltro of urbino appears in the background conversing with an asian , is related to the antisemitic intention of the predella .
he was buried in his father ’ s tomb in the church of santo spirito .
one standard display of drawing skill was his depiction of the mazzocchio .
the painting in his paintings has influenced many famous painters , such as piero della francesca , albrecht durer and leonardo da vinci .
pope hennessy is far more conservative than the italian authors : he attributes some of the works below to a " prato master " and a " karlsruhe master " .
most of the dates in the listhord come from borsi and borsiþ .
