emperor sutoku yoko ono ono ono -lrb- july 7,1119 – september 14,1164 -rrb- was the 75th emperor of japan , according to the traditional order of succession .
sutoku 's reign started in 1123 and ended in 1142 .
before he became the monarch , his personal namehesis -lrb- " imina " -rrb- was akihito dq [unk] 仁osome .
he was the eldest son of emperor toba .
he was the son of emperor shirakawa .
in 1151 , sutoko ordered waka imperial anthology " shika wakashu " .
in 1156 , after failing to put down the hogen rebellion , he was exiled to sanuki province prefecture .
emperor sutoku 's reign lasted for 19 years : 2 years in the " nengo " " tenji " , 5 years in " daiji " , 1 year in " ' tensho " , 6 years in hoen , and 1 year in eiji .
the site of sutoku 's grave is settled .
this emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial shinto shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine buddha -lrb- " misasagi " -rrb- in sakaide , kagawa .
he was enshrinedgated or sealed away . . .
the latter enshrined o-mono-nushi-no-mikoto , a god known to have restored harmony in yamato according to emperor sujinsky .
the imperial household agency designates this location as sutoku 's mausoleum .
it is formally named " shiramine no misasagi " .
" kugyo " cupping 公 [unk] [unk] [unk] [unk] [unk] [unk] -rrb- is a term for the very few most powerful men attached to the court of the emperor of japan in pre-meiji eras .
in general , this elite group included only three to four men at a time .
these were hereditary courtiers whose experience and background would have brought them to the pinnacle of a life 's career .
the years of sutoku 's reign are more identified by more than one era name .
after sutoku 's abdication and exile , he devoted himself to a monastic life .
he copied many scriptures and offered them to the court .
fearing that the scriptures were cursed , the court refused to accept them .
snubbed , sutoku was said to have resented the court and , upon his death , became an onryo .
everything from the fall in fortune of the imperial court , the rise of the samurai powers , draughts and internal unrests were blamed on his haunting .
along with sugawara no michizane and taira no masakado , he is often called one of the “ three great onryo of japan ” .
