a pencil is a tool for writing or drawing .
they are different from pens , which dispense liquid or gel ink onto the marked surface .
graphite pencils contain grey or black marks that are easily erased , but otherwise resistant to water , most chemicals , ultraviolet radiation and natural aging .
other types of pencil cores are used for drawing and sketching .
grease pencils have a soft , crayon-like waxy core that can leave marks on smooth surfaces such as glass or porcelain .
the most common pencil casing is thin wood , usually hexagonal in section but sometimes cylindrical or triangular , permanently bonded to the core .
to use the casing must be carved or peeled off to expose the working end of the core as a sharp point .
they support separate , mobile pigment cores that can be extended or retracted through the casing 's tip as needed .
the stylus was a thin metal stick made from wax .
as a technique for drawing , the closest predecessor to the pencil was silverpoint until around 1565 indicate as early as 1500 yd .
it could easily be sawn into sticks .
it remains the only large-scale deposit of graphite ever found in this solid form .
the black core of the pencil is still referred to as " lead " .
the mines were taken over by the crown and guarded .
graphite was used for pencils , but graphite was smuggled out .
the news of the usefulness of these early pencils spread far and wide , attracting the attention of artists all over the known world .
however , the distinctively square english pencils continued to be made with sticks cut from natural graphite into the 1860s .
the town of keswick , near the original findings of block graphite , still manufactures pencils .
around 1560 , an italian couple named simonio and lyndiana bernacotti made the first blueprints for the modern carpentry pencil .
english and german pencils were not available to the french during the napoleonic wars .
france was also unable to import the inferior german graphite pencil substitute .
in 1795 , nicolas jacques conte discovered a method of mixing powdered graphite with clay and forming the mixture into rods that were then fired in a kiln .
in 1802 , the making of graphite was made by the koh-i-noor company in vienna .
henry bessemer 's first successful invention invention invention invention invention invention invention invention invention invention invention 1838 忠 was a method of compressing graphite powder into solid graphite so the waste from sawing to be reused .
this invention was prompted by his father 's pencil factory in concord , which employed graphite found in new hampshire in 1821 by charles dunbar .
munroe 's method of making pencils was painstakingly slow , and in the neighbouring town of acton , a pencil mill owner named ebenezer wood set out to automate the process at his own pencil mill located at nashoba brook .
eberhard faber of new york , who was the leader in pencil production , helped create the first pencil factory in the united states .
by 1870 , the joseph dixon crucible company was the world 's largest dealer and consumer of graphite .
the favoured timber for pencils was red cedar as it was aromatic and did not splinter when sharpened .
in the early 20th century supplies of red cedar were cut down so that pencil manufacturers were forced to recycle the wood from cedar fences and barns to keep the supply .
during world war ii rotary pencil sharpeners were outlawed in britain because they wasted so much scarce lead and wood , and pencils had to be sharpened in the more conservative manner — with knives .
incense cedar , when dyed and perfumed to look like red cedar , was a good alternative and most pencils today are made from this timber which is grown in managed forests .
in southeast asia , the wood jelutong may be used to create pencils whilst the use of this rainforest species is controversial .
environmentalists prefer the use of pulai – another wood native to the region and used in pencil manufacturing .
lipman was the first person to put a pencil in a paper on 30 march 1858 .
in 1875 , the supreme court of the united states ruled against reckendorfer declaring the patent invalid .
historian henry petroski notes that while ever more efficient means of mass production of pencils has driven the replacement cost of a pencil down , before this people would continue to use even the stub of a pencil .
for those who " did not feel comfortable using a stub , pencil extenders were sold .
the use of an extender also means that the pencil does not change its heft as it wears down . "
these can be divided into two groups : propelling pencils use an internal mechanism to push the lead out from an internal compartment .
they are popular for their longevity .
it is a type of pencil .
the plastic pencil was made by empire inc . in 1969 and then by arthur d . little for empire from 1969 through the early 1970s .
residual graphite from a pencil stick is not poisonous .
until the middle of the 20th century the paint used for the outer coating could contain high concentrations of lead .
the lead is a mix of graphite and clay powders .
the amount of clay content added to the graphite depends on the intended pencil hardness .
the resulting strings are dipped in oil or molten wax , which seeps into the tiny holes of the material and allows for smooth writing .
a juniper or incense-cedar plank with several long parallel grooves is cut to make a " slat " .
another grooved plank is glued on top , and the whole assembly is then cut into individual pencils , which are then varnished or painted .
many pencils have an eraser on the top and so the process is usually considered incomplete at this point .
each pencil has a shoulder cut on one end of the pencil .
a rubber plug is then inserted into the ferrule to the end of the pencil .
graphite pencils are made from clay and graphite .
two pencils of the same grade but different manufacturers will not always make a mark of identical tone nor have the same hardness .
most manufacturers , and almost all in europe , call their pencils with the letters " h " skulls commonly " blackness " representing commonly " blackness " representing commonly " blackness " representing representing commonly " blackness " representing representing " f " jia " .
brookman , an english pencil maker , first used this name in the early 20th century .
graded pencils can be used for a very fast test .
this test defines a " pencil hardness " of a coating as the grade of the hardest pencil that does not permanently mark the coating when pressed firmly against it at a 45 degree angle .
most pencils made in the us are yellow .
at a time when most pencils were either painted in dark colours or not at all , the koh-i-noor was yellow .
it was suggested that the colour of the orient at a time when the best-quality graphite came from siberia .
other companies copied the yellow colour so that their pencils would be associated with this high quality brand .
german and brazilian pencils , for example , are often green , blue or black .
in southern europe , pencils tend to be dark red or black with yellow lines .
in india , the most common pencil colour scheme was dark red with black lines , and pencils with a large number of colour schemes are produced by various companies .
