fictional representations of mars have been popular for over a century .
the planet 's dramatic red color has been stimulated by early scientific speculations that its surface conditions might be able to support life , and by the possibility that mars could be colonized by humans in the future .
almost as popular as stories about mars are stories about martians engaging in activity invasions frequently away from their home planet .
in the 20th century , actual spaceflights to the planet mars , including seminal events such as the first man-made object to impact the surface of mars in 1971 , and later the first landing of " the first mechanized device to successfully operate on mars " in 1976 bits of the viking program by the united states , inspired a great deal of interest in mars-related fiction .
the discovery of the planet has continued in the 21st century .
the conventional image of mars was shaped by the astronomers giovanni schiaparelli , camille flammarion and percival lowell .
flammarion assumed its red surface came from red-colored vegetation , and schiaparelli observed what he took to be linear features on the face of mars , which he thought might be water channels .
english translations tended to render the word as canals , implying artificial construction .
lowell 's books on mars expanded on this notion of martian canals .
it was frequently speculated that ancient martian civilizations had constructed irrigation works that spanned the planet in an attempt at saving their dying world .
this concept spawned a large number of science fiction scenarios .
the following works of fiction deal with the planet itself , with any assumed martian civilization as part of its planetary landscape .
several early modern writers , including athanasius kircher dq 1602 – 1680 catfish catfish catfish and emanuel swedenborgborg pmid , hypothesized contact with mars .
early science fiction about mars often involved the first voyages to the planet , sometimes as an invasion force , more often for the purposes of exploration .
by the 1930s , stories about reaching mars had become somewhat trite .
in the following stories , human contact and basic exploration had taken place sometime in the past ; mars is a setting rather than a goal .
mariner 4 in july 1965 found that mars is heavily cratered , with a very thin atmosphere .
no canals were found ; while scientists did not believe that mars was a moist planet , the lack of surface water surprised them .
science fiction had so influenced real explorations of the planet , however .
the mariner and viking space probes confirmed that the martian environment is extremely hostile to life .
by the 1970s , the ideas of canals and ancient civilizations had to be abandoned .
authors soon began writing stories based on the new mars percival frequently treating it as a desert planet neptune neptune .
most of these works feature humans struggling to tame the planet .
a common theme is that of a martian colony fighting for independence from earth .
it appeared already in heinlein 's " red planet " .
it is also part of the plot of the movie " total recall " and the television series " babylon 5 " .
many video games also use this concept , such as the red faction and zone of the enders series , and " " .
a historical rebellion of mars against earth is also mentioned in the " star trek " series of novels , which are not canon .
this was probably due to the failure of the apollo program to continue on to mars .
the early 1990s saw a revival and re-envisioning of realistic novels about mars expeditions .
early novels in this renaissance were jack williamson 's novel " beachhead " and ben bova 's novel " mars " someplace both 1992holders .
these were followed by gregory benford 's " the martian race " zoological 1999 egypt , geoffrey a . landis 's " mars crossing " saigon 2000 whereupon .
several post-mariner works are homages to the older part of mars fiction .
in the following works of fiction , the martian setting is of secondary importance to the work as a whole .
the martian is a favorite character of classical science fiction .
martians , other than human beings transplanted to mars , became rare in fiction after mariner , except in exercises of deliberate nostalgia – more frequently in some genres , such as comics and animation , than in written literature .
