the barber of seville is an opera buffa in two acts by gioachino rossini with an italian libretto by cesare sterbini .
the libretto was based on pierre beaumarchais 's " le barbier de seville " .
the first performance of rossini 's opera silvio was in rome on 20 february 1816 .
rossini 's " barber " has been one of the greatest masterpieces of comedy in music .
after two hundred years it remains a popular work .
rossini 's opera is about the story of the first of the three plays by pierre beaumarchais .
mozart 's opera " the marriage of figaro " is based on the second part of the beaumarchais trilogy .
the first beaumarchais play was originally conceived as an opera comique , but was rejected by the comedie-italienne .
the play was first performed in paris in 1775 .
other operas based on the play were composed by giovanni paisiellorrado his " il barbiere di siviglia " premiered in 1782 naples , by nicolas isouard in 1796 , and then by francesco morlacchi in 1816 .
though paisiello triumphed for a time , only rossini 's version is the best of his work .
on 11 november 1868 , two days before rossini 's death , the composer costantino dall ' argine dunlope dunlop gave an opera based on the same libretto as rossini 's work .
the first performance was not a failure .
rossini was well known for having completed an average of two operas per year for 19 years , and in some years writing as many as four .
the music for " il barbiere di siviglia " was composed in just under three weeks .
the first performance of rossini 's opera at the teatro argentina in rome arbor was on february 20,1816naud was a disaster : the audience hissed and jeered throughout , and several on-stage accidents occurred .
many of the audience were supporters of one of rossini 's rivals , the veteran giovanni paisiello , who played on mob mentality to provoke the rest of the audience to dislike the opera .
paisiello had already composed the barber of seville .
in particular paisiello and his followers were opposed to the use of basso buffo , which is common in comic opera .
the second performance was a great success .
the play was very poorly received at first , but only to become a favorite within a week .
the opera was first performed in england on 10 march 1818 at the king 's theatre in london .
it was first performed in america on 3 may 1819 .
it was first performed in italian in new york , when manuel garciaylusylusylus played almavivavinsky and his italian troupe opened their first season there with " il barbiere " on 29 november 1825 at the park theatre .
the cast of eight had three other members of his family , including the 17-year-old maria-felicia , later known as maria malibran .
rosina was originally written for a contralto .
music critic richard osborne wrote in " the new grove dictionary of opera " .
rosina became a soprano in the " alto alto " .
however , it has also been noted that rossini , who frequently altered his music for specific singers , wrote a new aria for josephine fodor-mainvielle , a soprano who had sung rosina in the 1818 london premiere , and sang the new aria c . 1820 at the theatre-italien in paris , where it was published .
the singing lesson in act 2 has often been turned into a show-stopping cabaret .
she was known for her song " i vespri siciliani " .
she was accompanied by her husband , nellie melba , who was the mother of the queen .
pauline viardot began the practice of inserting alexander alyabyev 's " nightingale " .
maria callas sang a cut-down version of rossini 's " contro un cor . "
once after patti had sung a very florid version of the opera 's legitimate aria , ' una voce poco fa ' , rossini is reported to have asked her : " very nice , my dear , and who wrote the piece you have just performed ? "
the piece is a staple of the operatic repertoire because of a scarcity of true contraltos , the role of rosina has most frequently been sung by a coloratura mezzo-soprano soprano soprano sopranoologist with or without pitch changes , depending on the singer performs .
famous mezzo-soprano rosinas include teresa berganza , lucia valentini terrani , susanne marsee , susanne marsee , cecilia bartoli , joyce didonato , jennifer larmore , elina garanca , and vesselina kasarova .
famous rosinas are ewa podles .
" the square in front of bartolo 's house "
in a public square outside the house a band of musicians and a poor student named lindoro are serenading , to no avail , the window of rosina mukherjee ; " there , laughing in the sky " .
lindoro , who is really the young count almaviva in disguise , hopes to make the beautiful rosina love him for himself – not his money .
he pays the musicians who then leave .
rosina is the young ward of the grumpy , elderly bartolo .
figaro approaches singingicative aria : " largo al factotum della citta " ; " make way for the factotum of the city " ;
figaro used to be a servant of the count .
she sang the songs " all ' idea di quel metallo " and " at the idea of that metal " .
figaro says the count disguise himself as a soldier , ordered to be billeted with bartolo , so as to gain entrance to the house .
for this suggestion , figaro is richly rewarded .
in bartolo 's house with four doors , he says that he can not be in the room .
rosina 's cavatina , una voce poco fa , opens up a voice a little while ago .
this is sometimes reaching high ds or even fs .
rosina writes to him .
as she is leaving the room , bartolo and basilio enter .
bartolo is suspicious of the count .
rosina and figaro enter .
figaro asks rosina to write a short note to lindoro .
she also performed " dunque io son . tu non m ' inganni ? "
; " then i 'm the one . . you 're not fooling me ? "
she is surprised by bartolo , but she manages to fool him .
aria : " a un dottor della mia sorte " ; " to a doctor of my class "
count almaviva , disguised as a soldier , enters the house and demands to be quartered there .
berta the housekeeper rushes to bartolo for protection .
bartolo tells the " soldier " that he nedra bartolo legally has an official exemption .
almaviva pretends to be too drunk and fight .
while bartolo searches his clammed desk for the official document which would prove his exemption , almaviva whispers to rosina that he is lindoro in disguise , and passes a love-letter to her .
bartolo decides to know what is in the piece of paper in the hands , but she fools him by giving him a list of clothes .
bartolo and the count start arguing .
basilio enters ; then figaro , who warns that the noise of the argument is rousing the whole neighborhood .
finally , the noise attracts the attention of the officer of the watch and his troops , who crowd into the room .
bartolo demands that the officer arrest the " drunken soldier " .
but almaviva quietly reveals his true identity to the officer .
bartolo and basilio are surprised and mystified ; figaro laughs quietly at them .
she also said : " cold and still , just like a statue " concurrently .
the confusion makes everyone to suffer headaches and auditory hallucinations .
my head seems to be in a fiery forge : the sound of the anvils deafens the ear .
in bartolo 's house with a piano , he called it “ a room in bartolo ’ s house with a piano ” .
she becomes a singing teacher and pretending to act as substitute for the supposedly ailing basilio , rosina 's regular singing teacher .
bartolo is suspicious , but he allows almaviva to enter when the count gives him rosina 's letter .
he describes his plan to discredit lindoro whom he believes to be one of the count 's servants .
figaro arrives to shave bartolo .
bartolo makes such a scene he agrees , but in order not to leave the music master alone with rosina , the doctor has figaro shave him right there in the music room .
when basilio suddenly appears , almaviva is bribed by a full purse from almaviva and persuaded to leave again , with much discussion of how ill he looks .
- what do i see ? "
figaro begins to shave bartolo , but bartolo overhears the lovers conspiring , and drives everybody away .
the scene returns to the location of act 1 with a grill looking out onto the square .
bartolo tells basilio to have the notary ready to marry him to rosina that evening .
he explains his plot to come between the lovers .
basilio leaves and rosina arrives .
bartolo shows rosina the letter she wrote to " lindoro " .
rosina believes him and agrees to marry him .
during the music the player creates a thunder storm for the passage of time .
the count and figaro climb up a ladder to the balcony and enter the room through a window .
rosina shows almaviva the letter and says that she betrays her .
almaviva reveals his identity and the two reconcile .
almaviva and rosina are enraptured by one another .
two people are heard approaching the front door .
however , when the count , rosina , and figaro attempt to leave the ladder , they discover it has been removed .
figaro is one , but another is needed .
basilio can ' t refuse : the choice of accepting a bribe and being a witness to his marriage or receiving two bullets in the head ; basilio says unanimously .
he and figaro witness the signing to a marriage contract between the count and rosina .
bartolo rushes in , but is too late .
bartologues was the one who had removed the ladder .
the opera finishes with an anthem to loveliness " amor e fede eterna , si vegga in noi regnar ! "
