marble is a metamorphic rock .
marble is usually not foliated , although there are exceptions .
in geology , the term " marble " refers to metamorphosed limestone , but its use in stonemasonry more broadly means unmetamorphosed limestone .
marble is often used for making sculptures .
the word " marble " comes from the ancient greek , from the greek , " crystalline rock , shining stone " .
the word " marmoreal " is also used to mean marble-like .
the english term " marble " resembles the french .
marble is a type of rock that is made up of sedimentary carbonate rocks , most commonly limestone or dolomite rock .
metamorphism causes variable recrystallization of the original carbonate mineral grains .
the resulting marble rock is typically composed of a mosaic of carbonate crystals .
primary sedimentary textures and structures of the original carbonate rock biennale have typically been modified or destroyed .
pure white marble is the result of metamorphism of a very pure pure liszt-poor limestone .
there are various mineral impurities such as clay , sand , iron oxides , or chert .
green coloration is often due to serpentine resulting from originally magnesium-rich limestone or dolomite with silica impurities .
these various impurities have been mobilized and recrystallized by the intense pressure and heat of the metamorphism .
white marble has been used in sculptures since classical times .
this preference has to do with its softness , which made it easier to carve , relative isotropy and homogeneity , and a relative resistance to shattering .
also , the low index of refraction of calcite allows light to penetrate several millimeters into the stone before being scattered out .
construction marble is a stone which is composed of calcite , dolomite or serpentine .
the term " marble " is used for any crystalline calcitic rockraine and some non-calcitic rocks covering it .
tennessee marble is really a massive granular grey to pink to maroon ordovician limestone , that geologists call the holston formation .
ashgabat , the capital city of turkmenistan , was recorded in the 2013 " guinness book of records " as having the world 's highest concentration of white marble buildings .
the united states geological survey said that the us domestic marble production in 2006 was 46,400 tons valued at about $ 18.1 million , compared to 72,300 tons valued at $ 18.9 million in 2005 .
crushed marble production dates from 2006 to 2006,11.8 million tons of the total value of the city .
for comparison , crushed marble production was 7.76 million tons valued at $ 58.7 million , of which 4.8 million tons was finely ground calcium carbonate and the rest was construction aggregate .
u . s . dimension marble demand is about 1.3 million tons .
the dsan world demand for [mask] finished lunged marble index has shown a growth of 12 % annually for the 2000 – 2006 period , compared to 10.5 % annually for the 2000 – 2005 period .
the largest dimension marble application is tile .
in 1998 , marble production was dominated by 4 countries that accounted for almost half of world production of marble and decorative stone .
italy and china were the leaders , each representing 16 % of world production , while spain and india produced 9 % and 8 % respectively .
italy is the world leader in marble export , with 20 % share in global marble production , followed by china with 16 % , india with 10 % , spain with 6 % , and portugal with 5 % .
dust produced by cutting marble could cause lung disease but more research needs to be done on whether dust filters and other safety products reduce this risk .
the occupational safety and health administration has set the legal limitmissible exposure limitocation for marble exposure in the workplace as 15 mg / m total exposure and 5 mg / m respiratory exposure over an 8-hour workday .
nioshoshenko set up a recommended exposure limit of 10 mg / m total exposure and 5 mg / m respiratory exposure over an 8-hour workday .
vinegar or other acidic solutions should never be used on marble .
outdoor marble statues , gravestones , or other marble structures are damaged by acid rain .
the haloalkaliphilic methylotrophic bacterium " methylophaga murata " was isolated from bad marble in the kremlin .
bacterial and fungal degradation was detected in four samples of marble from milan cathedral ; black " cladosporium " attacked dried acrylic resin using melanin .
marble is considered the favorite medium for greek and roman sculptors and architects architects architects architects architects architects architects architects architects biennale .
its extremely varied and colorful patterns make it a favorite decorative material .
the cities of marble , minnesota , marble , colorado , texas , and marble hill , manhattan , new york are named after the stone .
the elgin marbles are marble sculptures from the parthenon in athens that are on display in the british museum .
they were brought to britain by the earl of elgin .
marble dust is combined with cement or synthetic resins to make " reconstituted " or " cultured marble " .
the appearance of marble can be simulated with faux marbling , a painting technique that imitates the color patterns of the stone .
