they have a high metabolic rate , a four-chambered heart , and a strong yet lightweight skeleton .
they range in size from the 5 cm -lrb- 2-3 -rrb- bee hummingbird to the 2.75 m ostrich .
they are the class of tetrapods with about ten thousand living species .
birds have wings which are more or less developed depending on the species .
wings , which evolved from forelimbs , gave birds the ability to fly .
the digestive and respiratory systems of birds are also adapted for flight .
some bird species of aquatic environments , particularly seabirds and some waterbirds , have evolved for swimming .
the fossil record shows that birds evolved from feathered dinosaurs in theropod group , which are traditionally placed within the saurischian dinosaurs .
the closest living relatives of birds are the crocodilians .
primitive bird-like dinosaurs have been found in the mid-jurassic period , about 170 million years ago .
many of these early " stem-birds " , such as " archaeopteryx " , had primitive characteristics such as teeth and long bony tails .
birds diversified dramatically around the time of the cretaceous – palaeogene extinction event 66 million years ago , which killed off the pterosaurs and all the non-avian dinosaur lineages .
but birds , especially those in the southern continents , survived this event and then migrated to other parts of the world .
this makes them the sole surviving dinosaurs .
some birds , especially crows and parrots , are among the most intelligent animals .
many species migrate great distances .
they communicate with visual signals , calls , and bird songs .
most bird species are socially monogamoustrictrictrictrictrictrictrictrictrictrictrictrictric referring to social living arrangement , distinct from genetic monogamyctic , usually for one breeding season at a time , sometimes for years , but rarely for life .
other species have breeding systems that are polygynousnousnousnous furnished arrangement of one male with many females millimetres .
birds produce offspring by laying eggs which are fertilised by sexual reproduction .
they are usually laid in a nest and incubated by the parents .
most birds have a period of time when they are young .
some birds , such as hens , lay eggs even when not fertilised , though unfertilised eggs do not produce offspring .
domesticated and undomesticated birdsttered poultry and gameboys are important sources of eggs , meat , and feathers .
songbirds , parrots , and other birds are popular as pets .
guano vidhan bird excrementocation is harvested for use as a fertiliser .
birds figure throughout human culture .
about 120-130 species have become extinct due to human activity since the 17th century , and hundreds more before then .
human activity threatens about 1,200 bird species with extinction .
birdwatching is an important part of the ecotourism industry .
the first classification of birds was made by francis willughby and john ray in their 1676 book " ornithologiae " .
linnaeus modified that work in 1758 to make the taxonomic classification system currently in use .
birds are the biological class aves in linnaean taxonomy .
phylogenetic taxonomy places aves in the dinosaur clade theropoda .
aves and a sister group , the order crocodilia , contain the only living representatives of the reptile clade archosauria .
aves is most commonly defined phylogenetically as all descendants of the most recent common ancestor of modern birds and " archaeopteryx lithographica " .
jacques gauthier gained wide currency in the 21st century .
gauthier defined aves to include only the crown group of the set of modern birds .
this was done by excluding most groups known only from fossils , and assigning them to the avialae .
gauthier identified four different definitions for the same biological name aves , which is a problem .
gauthier proposed to reserve the term aves only for the crown group .
he put other names to the other groups .
under the fourth definition " archaeopteryx " is an avialan , and not a member of aves .
gauthier 's proposals have been adopted by many researchers in the field of palaeontology and bird evolution , though the exact definitions applied have been inconsistent .
avialae is often used synonymously with the vernacular term " bird " by these researchers .
most researchers define avialae as branch-based clade , though definitions vary .
many authors have used a similar definition to " all theropods closer to birds than to " deinonychus " .
avialae is defined as a clade whose function is based on physical characteristicshesis .
jacques gauthier , who named avialae in 1986 , re-defined it in 2001 as all dinosaurs that possessed feathered wings used in flapping flight , and the birds that descended from them .
based on fossil and biological evidence , most scientists believe that birds are a specialised subgroup of theropod dinosaurs , and more specifically , they are members of maniraptora , a group of theropods which includes dromaeosaurs and oviraptors , among others .
as scientists have discovered more theropods closely related to birds , the distinction between non-birds and birds has become blurred .
recent discoveries in the liaoning province of northeast china , which demonstrate many small theropod dinosaurs , contribute to this ambiguity .
the flying theropods , or avialans , are the closest relatives of the deinonychosaurs , which include dromaeosaurids and troodontids .
together , these are called paraves .
some basal members of this group , such as " microraptor " , have features which may have enabled them to glide or fly .
the most basal deinonychosaurs were very small .
this evidence says that the ancestor of all paravians may have been arboreal , have been able to glide , or both .
recent studies suggest that the first avialans were omnivores .
the upper jurassic " archaeopteryx " is well known as one of the first transitional fossils to be found .
" archaeopteryx " was the first fossil to display both clearly traditional reptilian characteristics : teeth , clawed fingers , and a long , lizard-like tail , as well as wings with flight feathers similar to those of modern birds .
it is not considered a direct ancestor of birds , though it is possibly closely related to the true ancestor .
the earliest known avialan fossils come from the tiaojishan formation of china , which has been dated to the late jurassic periodoic eratian epochs , about 160 million years ago .
the avialan species from this time period include " anchiornis huxleyi " , " xiaotingia zhengi " , and " aurornis xui " .
the well-known early bird , " archaeopteryx " , dates from slightly later jurassic rockshesis about 155 million years oldcase from germany .
many of these early avialans shared unusual anatomical features that may be ancestral to modern birds , but were later lost during bird evolution .
these features include enlarged claws on the second toe which may have been held clear of the ground in life , and long feathers or " hind wings " covering the hind limbs and feet , which may have been used in aerial maneuvering .
the family lived during the cretaceous period .
many groups retained primitive characteristics , such as clawed wings and teeth , though the latter were lost independently in a number of avialan groups , including modern birds ulysses avesbilities .
the tail of more advanced avialans were shortened with the pygostyle bone in the group pygostylia .
in the upper cretaceous , about 100 million years ago , the ancestors of all modern birds evolved a more open pelvis .
about 95 million years ago , they evolved a better sense of smell .
the first large , diverse lineage of short-tailed avialans to evolve were the enantiornithes , or " opposite birds " .
enantiornithes occupied a wide array of ecological niches , from sand-probing shorebirds and fish-eaters to tree-dwelling forms and seed-eaters .
while they were the dominant group of avialans during the cretaceous period , enantiornithes became extinct .
they were semi-aquatic and specialised in eating fish and other small aquatic organisms .
unlike the enantiornithes , which dominated land-based and arboreal habitats , most early euornithes lacked perching adaptations .
the latter included the superficially gull-like " ichthyornis " and the hesperorniformes , which became so well adapted to hunting fish in marine environments that they lost the ability to fly and became primarily aquatic .
the early euornithes also saw the development of many traits associated with modern birds , like strongly keeled breastbones , toothless , beaked portions of their jaws .
euornithes also included the first avialans to develop true pygostyle and a fully mobile fan of tail feathers .
a study on mosaic evolution in the avian skull found that the last common ancestor of all neornithines might have had a beak similar to that of the modern hook-billed vanga and a skull similar to that of the eurasian golden oriole .
both species are small aerial and canopy foraging omnivores .
all modern birds lie within the crown group avesttered alternately neornithesdner , which has two subdivisions : the palaeognathae , which includes the flightless ratitesitesitesitesitesitesitesitestead and the weak-flying tinamous , and the extremely diverse neognathae , containing all other birds .
these two subdivisions are often given the rank of superorder , although livezey and zusi assigned them " cohort " rank .
depending on the taxonomic viewpoint , the number of known living bird species varies from 9,800 to 10,050 .
the discovery of " vegavis " , a late cretaceous member of the anatidae , proved that the diversification of modern birds started before the cainozoic .
the remains of an earlier fossil , the possible galliform " austinornis lentus " , dated to about 85 million years ago , are still too controversial to provide evidence of modern bird diversification .
studies agree on a cretaceous age for the most recent common ancestor of modern birds but estimates range from the middle cretaceous to the latest upper cretaceous .
there is no agreement on whether most of the early diversification of modern birds happened before or after the cretaceous – palaeogene extinction event .
this disagreement is in part caused by a divergence in the evidence .
modern birds originated early in the upper cretaceous , a pulse of diversification in all major groups occurred around the cretaceous – palaeogene extinction event .
cladogram of modern bird relationships based on prum , r . o . " et al " .
according to the website , it is named after yuri , t . et al .roud .
the classification of birds is a problem with birds .
sibley and ahlquist 's " phylogeny and classification of birds " – 1990 charlemagne is a landmark work on the classification of birds , although it is frequently debated and constantly revised .
evidence from modern bird anatomy , fossils and dna have all been brought to bear on the problem .
more recently new fossil and molecular evidence is providing an increasingly clear picture of the evolution of modern bird orders .
they live and breed in most terrestrial habitats and on all seven continents .
the highest bird diversity is in tropical regions .
recent studies found higher speciation rates in the high latitudes that were offset by greater extinction rates than in the tropics .
some seabird species come ashore only to breed and some penguins have been recorded diving up to 300 m deep .
many bird species have established breeding populations in areas to which they have been introduced by humans .
the ring-necked pheasant , for example , has been introduced around the world as a game bird .
others have been accidental , such as the establishment of wild monk parakeets in several north american cities after their escape from captivity .
some species , including cattle egret , yellow-headed caracara and galah , have spread naturally beyond their original ranges .
compared with other vertebrates , birds have a body plan that shows many unusual adaptations , mostly to facilitate flight .
the skeleton is made of very lightweight bones .
they have large air-filled cavitiescence called pneumatic cavities .
the skull bones in adults are fused .
the orbits are large and separated by a bony septum .
there are many cervical vertebrae , but there are many differences in the thoracic vertebrae .
the last few are fused with the pelvis to form the synsacrum .
the ribs are flattened and the sternum is keeled for the attachment of flight muscles .
the wings are changed into wings .
the wings are more or less developed depending on the species .
like the reptiles , birds are mainly uricotelic , that is , their kidneys extract nitrogenous waste from their bloodstream and excrete it as uric acid instead of urea or ammonia through the ureters into the intestine .
birds do not have a urinary bladder or external urethral opening .
however , birds such as hummingbirds can be facultatively ammonotelic , excreting most of the nitrogenous wastes as ammonia .
they also excrete creatine , rather than creatinine like mammals .
the material , as well as the output of the intestines , comes out from the bird 's cloaca .
the cloaca is a multi-purpose opening : waste is expelled through it , most birds mate by joining cloaca , and females lay eggs from it .
many species regurgitate pellets .
males within palaeognathaeogeny have a penis , which is never present in neoaves .
the length of the male is thought to be related to sperm competition .
when not copulating , it is hidden inside the cloaca , just inside the vent .
the digestive system of birds is unique .
most birds are adapted for rapid digestion .
some birds have adapted to use protein from many parts of their bodies , including protein from the intestines , as additional energy during migration .
birds have one of the most complex respiratory systems of all animal groups .
it goes directly into a back air sac .
the other 25 % of the air goes into the lungs .
when the bird exhales , the used air goes out of the lungs and the stored fresh air from the air sac is forced into the lungs .
a bird 's lungs get a constant supply of fresh air during both inhalation and exhalation .
the trachea is longer in some species , increasing the volume of vocalisations and the perception of the bird 's size .
in birds , the main arteries taking blood away from the heart originate from the right aortic archium .
the postcava receives blood from the limbs .
unlike in mammals , the circulating red blood cells in birds retain their nucleus .
the avian circulatory system is driven by a four-chambered heart that is in a fibrous pericardial sac .
the fluid is filled with a serous fluid for lubrication .
the heart is divided into two parts , the second half of the heart .
the atrium and ventricles of each side are separated by atrioventricular valves .
pacemaker cells are found in the sinoatrial node , on the right atrium .
the sinoatrial node uses calcium to cause a depolarising signal transduction pathway from the atrium through right and left atrioventricular bundle .
the avian heart also has muscular arches .
much like a mammalian heart , the avian heart is made up of endocardial , myocardial and epicardial layers .
the atrium walls tend to be thinner than the ventricle walls .
avian hearts are larger than mammalian hearts when compared to body mass .
this allows more blood to be pumped to meet the high metabolic need associated with flight .
birds have a very efficient system for getting oxygen into the blood .
birds have more blood than a mammal .
the arteries are made of thick elastic , and are more rigid .
blood moves through the arteries , which undergo vasoconstriction , and into arteriole .
as the arterioles move away from the heart and into individual organs and tissues they are further divided to increase surface area and slow blood flow .
blood travels through the arterioles and moves into the capillaries where gas exchange can occur .
capillaries are organized into capillary beds in tissues .
in the capillary beds , the blood is slowed to diffusion .
once the blood goes through veins and back to the heart , it travels through venules .
veins are very thin and rigid .
blood goes through the veins .
then the right ventricle is pumped through the lungs .
oxygenated blood goes from the lungs through the left atrium to the left ventricle where it is pumped out to the body .
the nervous system is large , but not the size of the bird .
the most developed part of the brain is the one that controls the flight-related functions , while the cerebellum controls movement and the cerebrum controls behaviour patterns , navigation , mating and nest building .
most birds have a poor sense of smell .
the avian visual system is developed highly .
water birds have special lenses , allowing for vision in air and water .
some species have both fovea .
they have ultraviolet ultraviolet ultraviolet vaporised cone cells in the eye as well as green , red and blue ones .
they also have double cones , likely to mediate achromatic vision .
many birds show plumage patterns in ultraviolet that are invisible to the human eye .
male blue tits have an ultraviolet reflective crown patch .
kestrels have been shown to search for prey by detecting the uv reflective urine trail marks left on the ground by rodents .
except pigeons and a few other species , the eyelids of birds are not used inrmed .
instead the eye is moved by the nictitating membrane , a third eyelid that moves horizontally .
the nictitating membrane also covers the eye and acts as a contact lens in many aquatic birds .
the retina has a fan shaped blood supply system called the pecten .
most birds rarely move their eyes , although there are exceptions , such as the great cormorant .
birds with eyes on the sides of their heads have a wide visual field .
in some birds such as the " asio " , " bubo " and " otus " owls , these feathers form tufts which resemble ears .
the inner ear has a cochlea , but it is not spiral as in mammals .
some species of pitohuis from new guinea have a powerful neurotoxin in their skin and feathers .
a lack of field observations limit our knowledge , but intraspecific conflicts are known to sometimes result in injury or death .
the screamersacker anhimidae , some jacanasraphers " jacana " , " hydrophasianus " ono ono onomede , and the spur-winged goose goose goose goose goose goose goose goose goose goose goose goose goose gooseously , the torrent-winged goose goose goose goose goose goose goose goose goose goose goose goose goose goose goose goose goose goose goose goose goose goose goose goose goose goose goose goose goose goose goose goose goose goose goose goose goose goose goose goose goose goose goose goose goose goose goose goose goose goose goose goose goose goose goose goose goose goose goose goose goose goose gooseened " plectropterus " plectropterus " pork " , the torrent " merganetta " , and nine species of lapwing " vanellus " vanellus " vanellus " use a sharp " as a sharp " weapon .
the steamer ducks ashore to use a bony knob and a bony knob on the metacarular metacarular mulluscs .
the jacanas " actophilornis " and " irediparra " have a longer blade-like radius .
the extinct " xenicibis " was unique in having an elongate forelimb and massive hand which likely functioned in combat or defense as a jointed club .
swans may strike with the bony spurs and bite when defending eggs or young .
there are two sexes : male and female .
the sex of birds is determined by the z and w sex chromosomes , rather than by the x and y chromosomes present in mammals .
male birds have two z chromosomes ; female birds have a w chromosome and a w chromosome chromosome chromosome plus wjhchi .
in nearly all species of birds , an individual 's sex is determined at fertilisation .
however , one recent study said that temperature-dependent sex determination was among the australian brushturkey .
this was later proven to not be the case .
these birds do not show temperature-dependent sex determination , but temperature-dependent sex deaths .
feathers are characteristic of birds plumage , though also present in some dinosaurs not currently considered to be true birds spp .
they are used in display , camouflage , and signalling .
there are several types of feathers .
feathers are epidermal growths attached to the skin .
the distribution pattern of these feather tracts amounted to .
the appearance of feathers on the body , called plumage , may vary within species by age , social status , and sex .
plumage is regularly moulted ; the standard plumage of a bird that has moulted after breeding is known as the " non-breeding plumage " , or in the humphrey-parkes terminology — " basic " ; breeding plumages or variations of the basic plumages are known under the humphrey-parkes system as " alternate plumages " .
moulting is annual in most species , although some may have two moults a year .
patterns vary across species .
in passerines , flight feathers are replaced one at a time with the innermost primary being the first .
when the fifth of sixth primary is replaced , the outermost tertiaries begin to drop .
after the innermost tertiaries are moulted , the secondaries starting from the innermost begin to drop and this proceeds to the outer feathersocksocksocksocksocksocksocksocksocksocksocksocksocksocks .
the greater primary coverts are moulted in synchrony with the primary that they overlap .
some species , such as ducks and geese , lose all of their flight feathers at once , temporarily becoming flightless .
as a general rule , the tail feathers are moulted and replaced with the innermost pair .
centripetal moults of tail feathers are however seen in the phasianidae .
the centrifugal moult is modified in the tail feathers of woodpeckers and treecreepers .
the general pattern seen in passerines is that the primaries are replaced outward , secondaries inward , and the tail from centre outward .
before nesting , the females of most bird species have a bare brood patch .
the skin there is well supplied with blood vessels and helps the bird in incubation .
feathers require maintenance and birds preen or groom them daily , spending about 9 % of their daily time on this .
the bill is used to brush away foreign particles and to apply waxy secretions from the uropygial gland .
this may be supplemented with the secretions of formic acid from ants , which birds receive through a behaviour known as anting , to remove feather parasites .
the scales of birds are made of the same keratin as beaks , claws , and spurs .
they are found mainly on the toes and metatarsus , but may be found further up on the ankle in some birds .
most bird scales do not overlap a lot , except in the cases of kingfishers and woodpeckers .
the scales of birds are thought to be homologous to those of reptiles and mammals .
most birds can fly .
flight is the main way of moving for most birds species .
birds have a lightweight skeleton , two large flight muscles , the pectoralis joshi which accounts for 15 % of the total mass of the bird extending and the supracoracoideus .
wing shape and size generally determine a bird 's flight style and performance ; many birds combine powered , flapping flight with less energy-intensive soaring flight .
about 60 living bird species are flightless , as were many extinct birds .
flightlessness often happens in birds on isolated islands , probably due to limited resources and the absence of land predators .
although flightless , penguins use similar musculature and movements to " fly " through the water , as do auks , shearwaters and dippers .
most birds are diurnal , but some birds , such as many species of owls and nightjars , are nocturnal or crepusculartively active during twilight hours .
they eat fruit , plants , seeds , carrion , and various small animals .
because birds have no teeth , their digestive system is adapted to process unmasticated food items that are swallowed whole .
birds that use many strategies to get food or feed on a variety of food items are called generalists .
different kinds of birds ' feeding strategies vary .
many birds live in insects , fruit , or seeds .
some will attack insects by suddenly attacking from a branch .
those species that seek pest insects are considered beneficial ' biological control agents ' and their presence encouraged in biological pest control programmes .
combined , insectivorous birds eat 400 – 500 million metric tons of arthropods annually .
nectar feeders such as hummingbirds , sunbirds , lories , and lorikeets amongst others have specially adapted brushy tongues .
shorebirds ' varied bill lengths and feeding methods result in the separation of ecological niches .
loons , diving ducks , penguins and auks pursue their prey underwater , using their wings or feet for propulsion .
flamingos , three species of prion , and some ducks are filter feeders .
geese and dabbling ducks are mainly grazers .
some species , including frigatebirds , gulls , and skuas , attack kleptoparasitism , stealing food items from other birds .
kleptoparasitism is thought to be a supplement to food obtained by hunting , rather than a significant part of any species ' diet .
other birds are scavengers , but some of these , like vultures , are specialised carrion eaters , while others , like gulls , corvids , or other birds of prey , are opportunists .
water is needed by many birds .
some desert birds can get their water needs entirely from moisture in their food .
they may also have other adaptations such as allowing their body temperature to rise , saving on moisture loss from cooling or panting .
seabirds can drink seawater .
most birds scoop water in their beaks and raise their head to let water run down the throat .
some species , especially of arid zones , belonging to the pigeon , finch , mousebird , button-quail and bustard families are capable of sucking up water without the need to tilt back their heads .
some desert birds depend on water sources .
many plovers carry water to their young by wetting their belly feathers .
some birds carry water for chicks at the nest in their crop .
the family , flamingos and penguins have adaptations to produce a nutritive fluid called crop milk that they provide to their chicks .
feathers are important to the survival of a bird , and need maintenance .
apart from physical wear and tear , feathers face the onslaught of fungi , ectoparasitic feather mites and birdlice .
the physical condition of feathers are kept by preening .
they also bathe in water or dust themselves .
while some birds dip into shallow water , more aerial species may make aerial dips into water .
some birds use loose soil to dust .
this behaviour is called anting in which the bird encourages ants to run through their plumage is also thought to help them reduce the ectoparasite load in feathers .
many species will spread out their wings and expose them to direct sunlight .
many bird species migrate to take advantage of global differences of seasonal temperatures .
these migrations vary among the different groups .
many landbirds , shorebirds , and waterbirds do annual long distance migrations .
these birds have a breeding season in the temperate or polar regions and a non-breeding season in the tropical regions or opposite hemisphere .
they reduce the size of some of their organs .
migration is very demanding , particularly as birds need to cross deserts and oceans without refuelling .
landbirds have a flight range of around 2500 km and shorebirds can fly up to 4000 km .
they spend the northern summer feeding in the north pacific off japan , alaska and california , an annual round trip of 64000 km .
other seabirds leave after breeding .
albatrosses nesting in the southern ocean often take tripolar trips between breeding seasons .
some bird species undertake shorter migrations , travelling only as far as is required to avoid bad weather or get food .
they can be found at a location in one year and absent the next .
this migration is usually associated with food availability .
species may also travel shorter distances over part of their range , with individuals from higher latitudes travelling into the existing range of conspecifics .
this is a large percentage of the migration of birds in some regions .
altitudinal migration is a short migration of birds in which they spend the breeding season at higher altitudes and move to lower ones during suboptimal conditions .
it is most often triggered by temperature changes and usually happens when the normal territories become inhospitable due to lack of food .
some species may also be nomadic , and they can move according to weather and food availability .
parrots as a family are very migratory but considered to either be dispersive , irruptive , nomadic or undertake small migrations .
in an experiment done in the 1950s , a manx shearwater released in boston in the united states returned to its colony in skomer , in wales within 13 days , a distance of 5150 km .
birds move through different ways .
for diurnal migrants , the sun is used to navigate by day , and a stellar compass is used at night .
birds that use the sun compensate for the changing position of the sun during the day .
the star 's orientation is the same as the star-shaped constellations around polaris .
these are backed up in some species by their ability to sense the earth 's geomagnetism through specialised photoreceptors .
they communicate with each other using sounds and sounds .
signals can be interspecificificificificificificificificificificificiation between species foley and intraspecificificificificificificificificificificificificificificificificinatorization .
birds may use plumage to assess and assert social dominance .
variation in plumage also allows the identification of birds , particularly between species .
visual communication among birds may also involve ritualised displays , which have developed from non-signalling actions such as preening , the adjustments of feather position , pecking , or other behaviour .
these displays may signal aggression or submission .
the most elaborate displays occur during courtship , where " dances " are often formed from complex combinations of many possible component movements .
bird calls and songs are the major ways birds communicate with sound .
this communication can be very complex .
calls are used for a variety of purposes , including mate attraction , evaluation of potential mates , bond formation , the claiming and maintenance of territories .
some birds also use mechanical sounds for auditory communication .
the " coenocorypha " snipes of new zealand drive air through their feathers , woodpeckers drum for long distance communication , and palm cockatoos use tools to drum .
while some birds are essentially territorial or live in small family groups , other birds may form large flocks .
the principal benefits of flocking are safety in numbers and increased foraging efficiency .
defence against predators is particularly important in closed habitats like forests , where ambush predation is common and multiple eyes can provide a valuable early warning system .
this has led to the development of many mixed-species feeding flocks , which are usually composed of many species .
costs of flocking include bullying of socially subordinate birds by more dominant birds and the reduction of feeding efficiency in some cases .
birds sometimes make similar to non-avian species .
plunge-diving seabirds associate with dolphins and tuna , which push shoaling fish towards the surface .
hornbills have a mutualistic relationship with dwarf mongooses .
the high metabolic rate of birds during the active part of the day is supplemented by rest at other times .
sleep birds often use a type of sleep known as vigilant sleep .
swifts are believed to be able to sleep in flight and radar observations suggest that they orient themselves to face the wind in their roosting flight .
there are some kinds of sleep which can be even when in flight .
some birds can fall into slow-wave sleep at a time .
the birds tend to exercise this ability depending on its position relative to the outside of the flock .
this may allow the eye opposite the sleeping hemisphere to remain vigilant for predators by looking the outer margins of the flock .
this adaptation is also known from marine mammals .
communal roosting is common in biology , where there is no loss of body heat .
roosting sites are often chosen with regard to thermoregulation and safety .
many sleep birds bend their heads over their backs and tuck their bills in their back feathers .
some birds rest on one leg , while some may pull up their legs into their feathers , especially in cold weather .
perching birds have a tendon locking mechanism that helps them hold on to the perch when they are asleep .
many ground birds , such as quails and pheasants , roost in trees .
a few parrots of the genus " loriculus " roost hanging upside down .
some hummingbirds go into a state of torpor .
this adaptation shows in nearly a hundred other species , including owlet-nightjars , nightjars , and woodswallows .
one species , the poorwill , enters a state of hibernation .
they may cool themselves by moving to shade , standing in water ,filtration their throat or by using special behaviours like urohidrosis to cool themselves .
ninety-five per cent of birds are socially monogamous .
these species pair for at least the length of the breeding season or – in some cases – for several years or until the death of one mate .
monogamy allows both paternal care and biparental care , which is important for species in which females need males ' assistance for successful brood-rearing .
among many socially monogamous species , extra-pair copulationylus is common .
it may also be the result of forced copulation in ducks and other anatids .
female birds have sperm storage mechanisms which allow sperm from males to remain viable long after copulation , a hundred days in some species .
sperm from multiple males may compete through this mechanism .
extra pair copulation is also possible to get better genes for her offspring .
males of species that engage in extra pair copulations will closely guard their mates to ensure the parentage of the offspring that they raise .
other mating systems , including polygyny , polyandry , polygamy , polygynandry , and promiscuity , also occur .
polygamous breeding systems arise when females are able to raise broods without the help of males .
some species may use more than one system depending on the circumstances .
breeding usually involves some form of courtship display , typically performed by the male .
most displays are simple .
some displays , however , are quite elaborate .
depending on the species , these may include wing or tail drumming , dancing , aerial flights , or communal lekking .
females are generally the ones that drive partner selection , although in the polyandrous phalaropes , this is reversed : plainer males choose brightly coloured females .
courtship feeding , billing and allopreening are commonly performed between partners , generally after the birds have paired and mated .
homosexual behaviour has been observed in males or females in many species of birds , including copulation , pair bonding , and joint parenting of chicks .
many birds defend a territory from others of the same species during the breeding season .
they can not defend their feeding territories , such as seabirds and swifts .
competition between and within species for nesting sites can be intense .
all birds lay amniotic eggs with hard shells made mostly of calcium carbonate .
hole and burrow nesting species tend to lay white or pale eggs , while open nesters lay camouflaged eggs .
there are many exceptions to this pattern , however , the ground-nesting nightjars have pale eggs , and camouflage is instead provided by their plumage .
this forces female parasites to match their eggs to those of their hosts .
the eggs are usually laid in a nest .
most species make nests , which can be cups , domes , plates , beds scrapes , mounds , or burrows .
some bird nests are very primitive .
most birds build nests in sheltered , hidden areas to avoid predation , but large or colonial birds may build more open nests .
during nest construction , some species seek out plant matter from plants with parasite-reducing toxins to improve chick survival .
some birds have no nests , but the cliff-nesting common guillemot lays its eggs on bare rock .
the absence of nests is especially common in ground nesting species where the newly hatched young are precocial .
incubation , which optimises temperature for chick development , usually begins after the last egg has been laid .
in monogamous species incubation duties are often shared , whereas in polygamous species one parent is wholly responsible for incubation .
warmth from parents passes to the eggs through brood patches , areas of bare skin on the abdomen or breast of the incubating birds .
incubation can be a very fast process .
the warmth for the incubation of the eggs of megapodes comes from the sun , decaying vegetation or volcanic sources .
incubation periods range from 10 dayslongs , cuckoos and passerine birds alike to over 80 days hoping for albatrosses and kiwis .
the diversity of characteristics of birds is great , sometimes even in closely related species .
there are several avian characteristics compared in the table below .
at the time of their hatching , chicks range in development from helpless to independent , depending on their species .
helpless chicks are called altricial , and tend to be born small , blind , immobile and naked .
altricial chicks need help thermoregulating and must be brooded for longer than precocial chicks .
the young of many bird species do not precisely fit into either the precocial or altricial category .
chicks at neither extreme but favoring one or the other may be termed semi-precocial or semi-altricial .
the length of parental care varies widely among different orders and species .
at one extreme , parental care in megapodes ends at hatching ; the newly hatched chick digs itself out of the nest mound without parental assistance and can fend for itself immediately .
the mother is fed by the parents for up to 14 months .
the chick guard stage describes the period of breeding during which one of the adult birds is permanently present at the nest after chicks have hatched .
the main purpose of the guard stage is to protect offspring from predators .
in some species , both parents care for nestlings and fledglings .
in some species , other members of the same species will help with raising the young .
such alloparenting is common among the corvida , which includes birds such as the true crows , australian magpie and fairy-wrens , but has been observed in species as different as the rifleman and red kite .
among most groups of animals , male parental care is rare .
in birds , however , it is quite common .
territory and nest site defence , incubation , and chick feeding are often shared tasks .
the point at which chicks leavege is different .
the chicks of the " synthliboramphus " murrelets leave the nest the night after they hatch , following their parents out to sea , where they are raised away from terrestrial predators .
some other birds such as ducks move their chicks away from the nest at an early age .
in most species , chicks leave the nest just before , or soon after , they can fly .
the amount of parental care after fledging varies .
chicks may also follow their parents during their first migration .
brood parasitism is more common in birds than any other type of organism .
after a parasitic bird lays her eggs in another bird 's nest , they are often accepted and raised by the host .
brood parasites may be either " obligate brood parasites " , which must lay their eggs in the nests of other species .
one hundred bird species , including honeyguides , icterids , and ducks , are obligate parasites , though the most famous are the cuckoos .
this means that all food brought to the nest will be fed to the parasitic chicks .
the peacock tail is perhaps the most famous example of sexual selection and the fisherian runaway .
commonly occurring sexual dimorphisms such as size and colour differences are energetically costly attributes that signal competitive breeding situations .
intersexual selection , also known as female choice , is a process where individuals of the more abundant sex compete with each other for the privilege to mate .
the traits of the individuals may evolve to become more effective in competitive breeding situations until the trait begins to limit the individual 's fitness .
conflicts between an individual fitness and signalling adaptations ensure that sexually selected ornaments such as plumage colouration and courtship behaviour are " honest " traits .
signals must be costly to ensure that only good-quality individuals can present these exaggerated sexual ornaments and behaviours .
inbreeding causes early death rates inbreeding depression faso in the zebra finch " taeniopygia guttata " .
embryo survivalisore is , hatching success of fertile eggsnged significantly lower for sib-sib mating pairs than for unrelated pairs .
darwin 's finch " geospiza scandens " experiences inbreeding depression creatorements reduced survival of offspring reeling .
incestuous matings by the purple-crowned fairy wren " malurus coronatus " cause severe fitness costs due to inbreeding depression reduces the size of eggshorts .
females paired with related males may undertake extra pair matings .
however , there are ecological and demographic constraints on extra pair matings .
43 % of broods produced by incestuously paired females contained extra pair young .
inbreeding depression occurs in the great titwyla " parus major " whenever the offspring produced as a result of a mating between close relatives show reduced fitness .
inbreeding is avoided by dispersal of individuals from their birthplace .
southern pied babblers " turdoides bicolor " appear to avoid inbreeding in two ways .
the first is through dispersal , and the second is by avoiding familiar group members as mates .
although both males and females disperse locally , they move outside the range where genetically related individuals are likely to be encountered .
within their group , individuals only get breeding positions when the opposite-sex breeder is unrelated .
cooperative breeding in birds typically occurs when offspring , usually males , delay dispersal from their natal group in order to stay with the family to help rear younger kin .
female offspring rarely stay at home .
inbreeding is avoided because it leads to a reduction in progeny fitness .
cross-fertilisation between unrelated individuals ordinarily leads to the masking of deleterious recessive alleles in progeny .
they occupy a wide range of ecological positions .
while some birds are generalists , others are highly specialised in their habitat or food requirements .
even within a single habitat , such as a forest , the niches occupied by different species of birds vary .
forest birds may be insectivores , frugivores , and nectar-eaters .
aquatic birds generally feed by fishing , plant eating , and piracy .
birds of prey specialise in hunting mammals or other birds , while vultures are specialised scavengers .
avivores are animals that feed on birds .
some nectar-feeding birds are important pollinators , and many frugivores play a key role in seed dispersal .
plants and pollinating birds often coevolve .
birds are often important to island ecology .
birds have often reached islands that mammals have not .
for example , in new zealand the moas were important browsers , as are the kereru and kokako today .
today the plants of new zealand retain the defensive adaptations evolved to protect them from the extinct moa .
nesting seabirds may also affect the ecology of islands and surrounding seas .
a wide variety of avian ecology field methods , including counts , nest monitoring , and capturing and marking , are used for research in avian ecology .
since birds are highly visible and common animals , humans have had a relationship with them since the dawn of man .
there are cooperative honey-gathering among honeyguides and african peoples such as the borana .
other times , they may be commensal .
several bird species have become commercially significant agricultural pests , and some pose an aviation hazard .
human activities can also be harmful , and have threatened many bird species with extinction purposes .
birds can act as vectors for spreading diseases such as salmonellosis , campylobacteriosis , mycobacteriosisisance avian tuberculosis tuberculosis tuberculosis tuberculosis tuberculosis tuberculosis tuberculosis tuberculosis tuberculosis tuberculosis tuberculosis tuberculosis tuberculosis tons , avian influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenza influenzacio , giardiasis , and cryptosporidiosis over long distances .
some of these are zoonotic diseases that can also be transmitted to humans .
domesticated birds raised for meat and eggs , called poultry , are the largest source of animal protein eaten by humans ; in 2003,76 million tons of poultry and 61 million tons of eggs were produced worldwide .
chickens account for much of human poultry consumption .
many birds are also hunted for meat .
bird hunting is mainly a recreational activity except in extremely undeveloped areas .
the most important birds hunted in north and south america are waterfowl .
muttonbirding is also popular in australia and new zealand .
although some hunting , such as muttonbirds , may be sustainable , hunting has led to the extinction of dozens of species .
other commercially valuable products from birds include featherstage especially the down of geese and ducksometricly , which are used as insulation in clothing and bedding , and seabird faecesloid guanowski , which is a valuable source of phosphorus and nitrogen .
the war of the pacific was a war fought in part over the control of guano deposits .
birds have been domesticated as pets and for practical purposes .
colourful birds such as parrots and mynas are bred in captivity or kept as pets .
falcons have been used for hunting and fishing .
messenger pigeons , used since at least one ad , remained important as recently as world war ii .
today , such activities are more common either as hobbies , for entertainment and tourism , or for sports such as pigeon racing .
amateur bird enthusiastsials called birdwatchers , twitchers or birdersthorpe number in the millions .
many homeowners erect bird feeders near their homes to attract various species .
bird feeding has grown into a multimillion dollar industry .
they play many different roles in religion and mythology .
in religion , birds may serve as messengers or priests and leaders for a deity , such as in the cult of makemake , in which the tangata manu of easter island served as chiefs or as attendants , as in the case of hugin and munin , the two common ravens who whispered news into the ears of the god odin .
in several civilisations of ancient italy , particularly etruscan and roman religion , priests were involved in augury , or interpreting the words of birds while the " auspex " suggests their activities to foretell events .
they may also serve as religious symbols , as when jonahbled hebrew : יונה , dovetails the fright , passivity , mourning , and beauty traditionally associated with doves .
in the case of the common peacock , which is seen as mother earth by the dravidians of india .
in the ancient world , doves were used as symbols of the mesopotamian goddess inanna dq .
in ancient greece , athena , the goddess of wisdom , wore a little owl .
in religious images preserved from the inca and tiwanaku empires , birds are shown in the process of transgressing boundaries between earthly and underground spiritual realms .
indigenous peoples of the central andes say that birds passing to and from metaphysical worlds .
birds have featured in culture and art since prehistoric times , when they were represented in early cave paintings .
some birds have been seen as monsters , including the mythological roc and the maori 's legendary pouakai , a giant bird which can take humans .
birds were later used as symbols of power , as in the magnificent peacock throne of the mughal and persian emperors .
many paintings of birds were commissioned for books .
one of the most famous of these bird artists was john james audubon .
birds are also important in poetry ; for example , homer put nightingales into his " odyssey " , and catullus used a sparrow as an erotic symbol in his catullus 2 .
the relationship between an albatross and a sailor is the central theme of samuel taylor coleridge 's " rime of the ancient mariner " .
other english metaphors derive from birds .
perceptions of bird species vary across cultures .
owls are associated with bad luck , witchcraft , and death in parts of africa .
hoopoes were considered sacred in ancient egypt .
in heraldry , birds , especially eagles , often appear in coats of arms .
they can include recordings of birds into their works , as otto respighirino and beatrice rothenberg , and duet with birds .
although human activities have allowed the expansion of a few species , such as the barn swallow and european starling , they have caused population declines or extinction in many other species .
over a hundred bird species have gone extinct in historical times .
there are about 1,227 species listed as threatened by birdlife international and the iucn in 2009 .
the most commonly cited human threat to birds is habitat loss .
other threats include overhunting , accidental mortality due to collisions with buildings or vehicles , long-line fishing bycatch , pollution disposal including oil spills and pesticide use issn , competition and predation from nonnative invasive species , and climate change .
governments and conservation groups work to protect birds .
one study estimated that conservation efforts saved 16 species of bird that would otherwise have gone extinct between 1994 and 2004 , including the california condor and norfolk parakeet .
