they have a high metabolic rate , a four-chambered heart , and a strong yet lightweight skeleton .
they are the class of tetrapods with about ten thousand living species .
some bird species of aquatic environments , particularly seabirds and some waterbirds , have evolved for swimming .
the fossil record shows that birds evolved from feathered dinosaurs in theropod group , which are traditionally placed within the saurischian dinosaurs .
primitive bird-like dinosaurs have been found in the mid-jurassic period , about 170 million years ago .
many of these early " stem-birds " , such as " archaeopteryx " , had primitive characteristics such as teeth and long bony tails .
birds diversified dramatically around the time of the cretaceous – palaeogene extinction event 66 million years ago , which killed off the pterosaurs and all the non-avian dinosaur lineages .
but birds , especially those in the southern continents , survived this event and then migrated to other parts of the world .
some birds , especially crows and parrots , are among the most intelligent animals .
they are usually laid in a nest and incubated by the parents .
most birds have a period of time when they are young .
some birds , such as hens , lay eggs even when not fertilised , though unfertilised eggs do not produce offspring .
domesticated and undomesticated birdsttered poultry and gameboys are important sources of eggs , meat , and feathers .
guano vidhan bird excrementocation is harvested for use as a fertiliser .
aves and a sister group , the order crocodilia , contain the only living representatives of the reptile clade archosauria .
aves is most commonly defined phylogenetically as all descendants of the most recent common ancestor of modern birds and " archaeopteryx lithographica " .
gauthier defined aves to include only the crown group of the set of modern birds .
gauthier identified four different definitions for the same biological name aves , which is a problem .
under the fourth definition " archaeopteryx " is an avialan , and not a member of aves .
gauthier 's proposals have been adopted by many researchers in the field of palaeontology and bird evolution , though the exact definitions applied have been inconsistent .
avialae is often used synonymously with the vernacular term " bird " by these researchers .
most researchers define avialae as branch-based clade , though definitions vary .
jacques gauthier , who named avialae in 1986 , re-defined it in 2001 as all dinosaurs that possessed feathered wings used in flapping flight , and the birds that descended from them .
based on fossil and biological evidence , most scientists believe that birds are a specialised subgroup of theropod dinosaurs , and more specifically , they are members of maniraptora , a group of theropods which includes dromaeosaurs and oviraptors , among others .
as scientists have discovered more theropods closely related to birds , the distinction between non-birds and birds has become blurred .
recent discoveries in the liaoning province of northeast china , which demonstrate many small theropod dinosaurs , contribute to this ambiguity .
the flying theropods , or avialans , are the closest relatives of the deinonychosaurs , which include dromaeosaurids and troodontids .
some basal members of this group , such as " microraptor " , have features which may have enabled them to glide or fly .
the most basal deinonychosaurs were very small .
this evidence says that the ancestor of all paravians may have been arboreal , have been able to glide , or both .
recent studies suggest that the first avialans were omnivores .
the upper jurassic " archaeopteryx " is well known as one of the first transitional fossils to be found .
"
archaeopteryx " was the first fossil to display both clearly traditional reptilian characteristics : teeth , clawed fingers , and a long , lizard-like tail , as well as wings with flight feathers similar to those of modern birds .
it is not considered a direct ancestor of birds , though it is possibly closely related to the true ancestor .
the earliest known avialan fossils come from the tiaojishan formation of china , which has been dated to the late jurassic periodoic eratian epochs , about 160 million years ago .
many of these early avialans shared unusual anatomical features that may be ancestral to modern birds , but were later lost during bird evolution .
these features include enlarged claws on the second toe which may have been held clear of the ground in life , and long feathers or " hind wings " covering the hind limbs and feet , which may have been used in aerial maneuvering .
the family lived during the cretaceous period .
many groups retained primitive characteristics , such as clawed wings and teeth , though the latter were lost independently in a number of avialan groups , including modern birds ulysses avesbilities .
the tail of more advanced avialans were shortened with the pygostyle bone in the group pygostylia .
in the upper cretaceous , about 100 million years ago , the ancestors of all modern birds evolved a more open pelvis .
the first large , diverse lineage of short-tailed avialans to evolve were the enantiornithes , or " opposite birds " .
enantiornithes occupied a wide array of ecological niches , from sand-probing shorebirds and fish-eaters to tree-dwelling forms and seed-eaters .
while they were the dominant group of avialans during the cretaceous period , enantiornithes became extinct .
they were semi-aquatic and specialised in eating fish and other small aquatic organisms .
unlike the enantiornithes , which dominated land-based and arboreal habitats , most early euornithes lacked perching adaptations .
the latter included the superficially gull-like " ichthyornis " and the hesperorniformes , which became so well adapted to hunting fish in marine environments that they lost the ability to fly and became primarily aquatic .
the early euornithes also saw the development of many traits associated with modern birds , like strongly keeled breastbones , toothless , beaked portions of their jaws .
both species are small aerial and canopy foraging omnivores .
all modern birds lie within the crown group avesttered alternately neornithesdner , which has two subdivisions : the palaeognathae , which includes the flightless ratitesitesitesitesitesitesitesitestead and the weak-flying tinamous , and the extremely diverse neognathae , containing all other birds .
these two subdivisions are often given the rank of superorder , although livezey and zusi assigned them " cohort " rank .
depending on the taxonomic viewpoint , the number of known living bird species varies from 9,800 to 10,050 .
the discovery of " vegavis " , a late cretaceous member of the anatidae , proved that the diversification of modern birds started before the cainozoic .
the remains of an earlier fossil , the possible galliform " austinornis lentus " , dated to about 85 million years ago , are still too controversial to provide evidence of modern bird diversification .
studies agree on a cretaceous age for the most recent common ancestor of modern birds but estimates range from the middle cretaceous to the latest upper cretaceous .
modern birds originated early in the upper cretaceous , a pulse of diversification in all major groups occurred around the cretaceous – palaeogene extinction event .
sibley and ahlquist 's " phylogeny and classification of birds " – 1990 charlemagne is a landmark work on the classification of birds , although it is frequently debated and constantly revised .
evidence from modern bird anatomy , fossils and dna have all been brought to bear on the problem .
more recently new fossil and molecular evidence is providing an increasingly clear picture of the evolution of modern bird orders .
the highest bird diversity is in tropical regions .
recent studies found higher speciation rates in the high latitudes that were offset by greater extinction rates than in the tropics .
many bird species have established breeding populations in areas to which they have been introduced by humans .
the ring-necked pheasant , for example , has been introduced around the world as a game bird .
others have been accidental , such as the establishment of wild monk parakeets in several north american cities after their escape from captivity .
some species , including cattle egret , yellow-headed caracara and galah , have spread naturally beyond their original ranges .
compared with other vertebrates , birds have a body plan that shows many unusual adaptations , mostly to facilitate flight .
the ribs are flattened and the sternum is keeled for the attachment of flight muscles .
like the reptiles , birds are mainly uricotelic , that is , their kidneys extract nitrogenous waste from their bloodstream and excrete it as uric acid instead of urea or ammonia through the ureters into the intestine .
however , birds such as hummingbirds can be facultatively ammonotelic , excreting most of the nitrogenous wastes as ammonia .
the material , as well as the output of the intestines , comes out from the bird 's cloaca .
the cloaca is a multi-purpose opening : waste is expelled through it , most birds mate by joining cloaca , and females lay eggs from it .
the length of the male is thought to be related to sperm competition .
some birds have adapted to use protein from many parts of their bodies , including protein from the intestines , as additional energy during migration .
birds have one of the most complex respiratory systems of all animal groups .
when the bird exhales , the used air goes out of the lungs and the stored fresh air from the air sac is forced into the lungs .
the trachea is longer in some species , increasing the volume of vocalisations and the perception of the bird 's size .
pacemaker cells are found in the sinoatrial node , on the right atrium .
much like a mammalian heart , the avian heart is made up of endocardial , myocardial and epicardial layers .
avian hearts are larger than mammalian hearts when compared to body mass .
birds have a very efficient system for getting oxygen into the blood .
blood moves through the arteries , which undergo vasoconstriction , and into arteriole .
as the arterioles move away from the heart and into individual organs and tissues they are further divided to increase surface area and slow blood flow .
blood travels through the arterioles and moves into the capillaries where gas exchange can occur .
once the blood goes through veins and back to the heart , it travels through venules .
oxygenated blood goes from the lungs through the left atrium to the left ventricle where it is pumped out to the body .
the nervous system is large , but not the size of the bird .
the most developed part of the brain is the one that controls the flight-related functions , while the cerebellum controls movement and the cerebrum controls behaviour patterns , navigation , mating and nest building .
most birds have a poor sense of smell .
water birds have special lenses , allowing for vision in air and water .
many birds show plumage patterns in ultraviolet that are invisible to the human eye .
kestrels have been shown to search for prey by detecting the uv reflective urine trail marks left on the ground by rodents .
except pigeons and a few other species , the eyelids of birds are not used inrmed .
instead the eye is moved by the nictitating membrane , a third eyelid that moves horizontally .
most birds rarely move their eyes , although there are exceptions , such as the great cormorant .
some species of pitohuis from new guinea have a powerful neurotoxin in their skin and feathers .
a lack of field observations limit our knowledge , but intraspecific conflicts are known to sometimes result in injury or death .
the sex of birds is determined by the z and w sex chromosomes , rather than by the x and y chromosomes present in mammals .
in nearly all species of birds , an individual 's sex is determined at fertilisation .
this was later proven to not be the case .
feathers are characteristic of birds plumage , though also present in some dinosaurs not currently considered to be true birds spp .
the distribution pattern of these feather tracts amounted to .
the appearance of feathers on the body , called plumage , may vary within species by age , social status , and sex .
plumage is regularly moulted ; the standard plumage of a bird that has moulted after breeding is known as the " non-breeding plumage " , or in the humphrey-parkes terminology — " basic " ; breeding plumages or variations of the basic plumages are known under the humphrey-parkes system as " alternate plumages " .
in passerines , flight feathers are replaced one at a time with the innermost primary being the first .
when the fifth of sixth primary is replaced , the outermost tertiaries begin to drop .
some species , such as ducks and geese , lose all of their flight feathers at once , temporarily becoming flightless .
as a general rule , the tail feathers are moulted and replaced with the innermost pair .
the general pattern seen in passerines is that the primaries are replaced outward , secondaries inward , and the tail from centre outward .
before nesting , the females of most bird species have a bare brood patch .
feathers require maintenance and birds preen or groom them daily , spending about 9 % of their daily time on this .
the bill is used to brush away foreign particles and to apply waxy secretions from the uropygial gland .
this may be supplemented with the secretions of formic acid from ants , which birds receive through a behaviour known as anting , to remove feather parasites .
the scales of birds are made of the same keratin as beaks , claws , and spurs .
they are found mainly on the toes and metatarsus , but may be found further up on the ankle in some birds .
most bird scales do not overlap a lot , except in the cases of kingfishers and woodpeckers .
birds have a lightweight skeleton , two large flight muscles , the pectoralis joshi which accounts for 15 % of the total mass of the bird extending and the supracoracoideus .
wing shape and size generally determine a bird 's flight style and performance ; many birds combine powered , flapping flight with less energy-intensive soaring flight .
about 60 living bird species are flightless , as were many extinct birds .
flightlessness often happens in birds on isolated islands , probably due to limited resources and the absence of land predators .
although flightless , penguins use similar musculature and movements to " fly " through the water , as do auks , shearwaters and dippers .
because birds have no teeth , their digestive system is adapted to process unmasticated food items that are swallowed whole .
birds that use many strategies to get food or feed on a variety of food items are called generalists .
nectar feeders such as hummingbirds , sunbirds , lories , and lorikeets amongst others have specially adapted brushy tongues .
shorebirds ' varied bill lengths and feeding methods result in the separation of ecological niches .
flamingos , three species of prion , and some ducks are filter feeders .
kleptoparasitism is thought to be a supplement to food obtained by hunting , rather than a significant part of any species ' diet .
other birds are scavengers , but some of these , like vultures , are specialised carrion eaters , while others , like gulls , corvids , or other birds of prey , are opportunists .
they may also have other adaptations such as allowing their body temperature to rise , saving on moisture loss from cooling or panting .
most birds scoop water in their beaks and raise their head to let water run down the throat .
some species , especially of arid zones , belonging to the pigeon , finch , mousebird , button-quail and bustard families are capable of sucking up water without the need to tilt back their heads .
many plovers carry water to their young by wetting their belly feathers .
the family , flamingos and penguins have adaptations to produce a nutritive fluid called crop milk that they provide to their chicks .
feathers are important to the survival of a bird , and need maintenance .
apart from physical wear and tear , feathers face the onslaught of fungi , ectoparasitic feather mites and birdlice .
the physical condition of feathers are kept by preening .
this behaviour is called anting in which the bird encourages ants to run through their plumage is also thought to help them reduce the ectoparasite load in feathers .
many species will spread out their wings and expose them to direct sunlight .
migration is very demanding , particularly as birds need to cross deserts and oceans without refuelling .
some bird species undertake shorter migrations , travelling only as far as is required to avoid bad weather or get food .
species may also travel shorter distances over part of their range , with individuals from higher latitudes travelling into the existing range of conspecifics .
this is a large percentage of the migration of birds in some regions .
altitudinal migration is a short migration of birds in which they spend the breeding season at higher altitudes and move to lower ones during suboptimal conditions .
it is most often triggered by temperature changes and usually happens when the normal territories become inhospitable due to lack of food .
some species may also be nomadic , and they can move according to weather and food availability .
the star 's orientation is the same as the star-shaped constellations around polaris .
birds may use plumage to assess and assert social dominance .
variation in plumage also allows the identification of birds , particularly between species .
visual communication among birds may also involve ritualised displays , which have developed from non-signalling actions such as preening , the adjustments of feather position , pecking , or other behaviour .
the most elaborate displays occur during courtship , where " dances " are often formed from complex combinations of many possible component movements .
calls are used for a variety of purposes , including mate attraction , evaluation of potential mates , bond formation , the claiming and maintenance of territories .
the " coenocorypha " snipes of new zealand drive air through their feathers , woodpeckers drum for long distance communication , and palm cockatoos use tools to drum .
defence against predators is particularly important in closed habitats like forests , where ambush predation is common and multiple eyes can provide a valuable early warning system .
the high metabolic rate of birds during the active part of the day is supplemented by rest at other times .
swifts are believed to be able to sleep in flight and radar observations suggest that they orient themselves to face the wind in their roosting flight .
there are some kinds of sleep which can be even when in flight .
the birds tend to exercise this ability depending on its position relative to the outside of the flock .
this may allow the eye opposite the sleeping hemisphere to remain vigilant for predators by looking the outer margins of the flock .
communal roosting is common in biology , where there is no loss of body heat .
roosting sites are often chosen with regard to thermoregulation and safety .
many sleep birds bend their heads over their backs and tuck their bills in their back feathers .
some birds rest on one leg , while some may pull up their legs into their feathers , especially in cold weather .
one species , the poorwill , enters a state of hibernation .
they may cool themselves by moving to shade , standing in water ,filtration their throat or by using special behaviours like urohidrosis to cool themselves .
ninety-five per cent of birds are socially monogamous .
these species pair for at least the length of the breeding season or – in some cases – for several years or until the death of one mate .
monogamy allows both paternal care and biparental care , which is important for species in which females need males ' assistance for successful brood-rearing .
it may also be the result of forced copulation in ducks and other anatids .
female birds have sperm storage mechanisms which allow sperm from males to remain viable long after copulation , a hundred days in some species .
extra pair copulation is also possible to get better genes for her offspring .
males of species that engage in extra pair copulations will closely guard their mates to ensure the parentage of the offspring that they raise .
polygamous breeding systems arise when females are able to raise broods without the help of males .
females are generally the ones that drive partner selection , although in the polyandrous phalaropes , this is reversed : plainer males choose brightly coloured females .
courtship feeding , billing and allopreening are commonly performed between partners , generally after the birds have paired and mated .
homosexual behaviour has been observed in males or females in many species of birds , including copulation , pair bonding , and joint parenting of chicks .
many birds defend a territory from others of the same species during the breeding season .
they can not defend their feeding territories , such as seabirds and swifts .
hole and burrow nesting species tend to lay white or pale eggs , while open nesters lay camouflaged eggs .
there are many exceptions to this pattern , however , the ground-nesting nightjars have pale eggs , and camouflage is instead provided by their plumage .
most birds build nests in sheltered , hidden areas to avoid predation , but large or colonial birds may build more open nests .
during nest construction , some species seek out plant matter from plants with parasite-reducing toxins to improve chick survival .
some birds have no nests , but the cliff-nesting common guillemot lays its eggs on bare rock .
incubation , which optimises temperature for chick development , usually begins after the last egg has been laid .
in monogamous species incubation duties are often shared , whereas in polygamous species one parent is wholly responsible for incubation .
warmth from parents passes to the eggs through brood patches , areas of bare skin on the abdomen or breast of the incubating birds .
the warmth for the incubation of the eggs of megapodes comes from the sun , decaying vegetation or volcanic sources .
the young of many bird species do not precisely fit into either the precocial or altricial category .
the length of parental care varies widely among different orders and species .
at one extreme , parental care in megapodes ends at hatching ; the newly hatched chick digs itself out of the nest mound without parental assistance and can fend for itself immediately .
the chick guard stage describes the period of breeding during which one of the adult birds is permanently present at the nest after chicks have hatched .
in some species , both parents care for nestlings and fledglings .
in some species , other members of the same species will help with raising the young .
such alloparenting is common among the corvida , which includes birds such as the true crows , australian magpie and fairy-wrens , but has been observed in species as different as the rifleman and red kite .
the chicks of the " synthliboramphus " murrelets leave the nest the night after they hatch , following their parents out to sea , where they are raised away from terrestrial predators .
some other birds such as ducks move their chicks away from the nest at an early age .
in most species , chicks leave the nest just before , or soon after , they can fly .
the amount of parental care after fledging varies .
after a parasitic bird lays her eggs in another bird 's nest , they are often accepted and raised by the host .
brood parasites may be either " obligate brood parasites " , which must lay their eggs in the nests of other species .
one hundred bird species , including honeyguides , icterids , and ducks , are obligate parasites , though the most famous are the cuckoos .
the peacock tail is perhaps the most famous example of sexual selection and the fisherian runaway .
intersexual selection , also known as female choice , is a process where individuals of the more abundant sex compete with each other for the privilege to mate .
the traits of the individuals may evolve to become more effective in competitive breeding situations until the trait begins to limit the individual 's fitness .
conflicts between an individual fitness and signalling adaptations ensure that sexually selected ornaments such as plumage colouration and courtship behaviour are " honest " traits .
signals must be costly to ensure that only good-quality individuals can present these exaggerated sexual ornaments and behaviours .
inbreeding causes early death rates inbreeding depression faso in the zebra finch " taeniopygia guttata " .
embryo survivalisore is , hatching success of fertile eggsnged significantly lower for sib-sib mating pairs than for unrelated pairs .
incestuous matings by the purple-crowned fairy wren " malurus coronatus " cause severe fitness costs due to inbreeding depression reduces the size of eggshorts .
however , there are ecological and demographic constraints on extra pair matings .
inbreeding depression occurs in the great titwyla " parus major " whenever the offspring produced as a result of a mating between close relatives show reduced fitness .
inbreeding is avoided by dispersal of individuals from their birthplace .
the first is through dispersal , and the second is by avoiding familiar group members as mates .
within their group , individuals only get breeding positions when the opposite-sex breeder is unrelated .
cooperative breeding in birds typically occurs when offspring , usually males , delay dispersal from their natal group in order to stay with the family to help rear younger kin .
inbreeding is avoided because it leads to a reduction in progeny fitness .
while some birds are generalists , others are highly specialised in their habitat or food requirements .
even within a single habitat , such as a forest , the niches occupied by different species of birds vary .
birds of prey specialise in hunting mammals or other birds , while vultures are specialised scavengers .
some nectar-feeding birds are important pollinators , and many frugivores play a key role in seed dispersal .
today the plants of new zealand retain the defensive adaptations evolved to protect them from the extinct moa .
several bird species have become commercially significant agricultural pests , and some pose an aviation hazard .
human activities can also be harmful , and have threatened many bird species with extinction purposes .
some of these are zoonotic diseases that can also be transmitted to humans .
domesticated birds raised for meat and eggs , called poultry , are the largest source of animal protein eaten by humans ; in 2003,76 million tons of poultry and 61 million tons of eggs were produced worldwide .
many birds are also hunted for meat .
other commercially valuable products from birds include featherstage especially the down of geese and ducksometricly , which are used as insulation in clothing and bedding , and seabird faecesloid guanowski , which is a valuable source of phosphorus and nitrogen .
messenger pigeons , used since at least one ad , remained important as recently as world war ii .
today , such activities are more common either as hobbies , for entertainment and tourism , or for sports such as pigeon racing .
in religion , birds may serve as messengers or priests and leaders for a deity , such as in the cult of makemake , in which the tangata manu of easter island served as chiefs or as attendants , as in the case of hugin and munin , the two common ravens who whispered news into the ears of the god odin .
in several civilisations of ancient italy , particularly etruscan and roman religion , priests were involved in augury , or interpreting the words of birds while the " auspex " suggests their activities to foretell events .
they may also serve as religious symbols , as when jonahbled hebrew : יונה , dovetails the fright , passivity , mourning , and beauty traditionally associated with doves .
in the ancient world , doves were used as symbols of the mesopotamian goddess inanna dq .
in religious images preserved from the inca and tiwanaku empires , birds are shown in the process of transgressing boundaries between earthly and underground spiritual realms .
indigenous peoples of the central andes say that birds passing to and from metaphysical worlds .
birds have featured in culture and art since prehistoric times , when they were represented in early cave paintings .
some birds have been seen as monsters , including the mythological roc and the maori 's legendary pouakai , a giant bird which can take humans .
birds were later used as symbols of power , as in the magnificent peacock throne of the mughal and persian emperors .
birds are also important in poetry ; for example , homer put nightingales into his " odyssey " , and catullus used a sparrow as an erotic symbol in his catullus 2 .
the relationship between an albatross and a sailor is the central theme of samuel taylor coleridge 's " rime of the ancient mariner " .
in heraldry , birds , especially eagles , often appear in coats of arms .
they can include recordings of birds into their works , as otto respighirino and beatrice rothenberg , and duet with birds .
although human activities have allowed the expansion of a few species , such as the barn swallow and european starling , they have caused population declines or extinction in many other species .
over a hundred bird species have gone extinct in historical times .
there are about 1,227 species listed as threatened by birdlife international and the iucn in 2009 .
the most commonly cited human threat to birds is habitat loss .
one study estimated that conservation efforts saved 16 species of bird that would otherwise have gone extinct between 1994 and 2004 , including the california condor and norfolk parakeet .