israel and judah were kingdoms of the iron age in the ancient levant .
israel became an important local power by the 10th century bce before falling to the assyrian empire in 722 bc .
israel 's southern neighbor , the kingdom of judah , became a client state of the neo-assyrian empire and then the neo-babylonian empire before a revolt against the latter led to its destruction in 586 bce .
after the fall of babylon to the achaemenid empire under cyrus the great in 539 bce , some judean exiles returned to jerusalem .
in the 2nd century bce the judaeans revolted against the seleucid empire and created the hasmonean kingdom .
after the client kingdoms under herodian , judea was wracked by civil disturbances .
the eastern mediterranean seaboard the levant is 400 miles north to south from the taurus mountains to the sinai peninsula , and 70 to 100 miles east to west between the sea and the arabian desert .
to the east again lie the steep-sided valley occupied by the jordan river , the dead sea , and the wadi of the arabah , which goes down to the eastern arm of the red sea .
beyond the plateau is the syrian desert .
the location of the narrow levant made the area a battleground between the powerful entities that surrounded it .
canaan in the late bronze age was a shadow of what it had been centuries ago : many cities were abandoned , others shrank in size , and the total settled population was probably not much more than a hundred thousand .
letters from the egyptian archives indicate that jerusalem was already a canaanite city-state recognising egyptian overlordship .
it was dominated by egypt , each city under its own ruler , constantly at odds with its neighbours , and appealing to the egyptians to adjudicate their differences .
the canaanite city state system broke down during the late bronze age collapse .
archaeologist paula mcnutt says : " it is probably . . . during iron age i that a population began to identify itself as ' israelite ' , ' on religion and prohibitions .
archaeologists and historians try to trace the origins of these villagers have found it impossible to identify any distinctive features that could define them as specifically israelite collared-rim jars and four-room houses have been identified outside the highlands .
israel finkelstein proposed that the oval or circular layout that distinguishes some of the earliest highland sites , and the notable absence of pig bones from hill sites , could be taken as markers of ethnicity , but others have cautioned that these can be a " common-sense " adaptation to highland life and not revelatory origins of origins .
they described how , up until 1967 , the land in the highlands of western palestine was virtually an archaeological " terra incognita " .
these surveys have shown the sudden emergence of a new culture in the land of israel earlier during iron age i .
this new culture is characterised by a lack of pork remains ; whereas pork formed 20 % of the philistine diet in places nostrils .
in the central highlands this unification in a kingdom with the city of samaria as its capital , possibly by the second half of the 10th century bc .
israel had clearly emerged by the middle of the 9th century bce , when the assyrian king shalmaneser iii names ahab the israelite among his enemies at the battle of qarqar .
at this time israel was engaged in a three-way contest with damascus and tyre for control of the jezreel valley and galilee in the north , and with moab , ammon and aram damascus in the east for control of gilead ; the mesha stelepool , left by a king of the molb , throwing off the house of omab , " .
both the bible and assyrian sources say that many people from israel and their replacement with settlers from other parts of the empire such as the assyrian empire were an established part of assyrian imperial policy , a means of breaking the old power structure and never again became an independent political entity .
there are indications that during the 10th and 9th centuries bce , the southern highlands had been divided between a number of centres , none with clear primacy .
during the reign of hezekiah , between 715 and 686 bc , a notable increase in the power of the judean state can be observed .
the siloam inscription , a lintel-like stone inscription , is found over the doorway of a tomb .
they were used throughout sennacherib 's 29-year reign , along with bullae from sealed documents .
in the 7th century jerusalem grew to have a population many times greater than earlier .
this was probably the result of a cooperative arrangement with the assyrians to establish judah as an assyrian vassal state controlling the valuable olive industry .
judah prospered as a vassal state , despite a disastrous rebellion against sennacheriboitius , but in the last half of the 7th century bce , assyria suddenly collapsed , and the ensuing competition between egypt and the neo-babylonian empire for control of judah .
babylonian judah suffered a steep decline in both economy and population .
jerusalem , while probably not totally abandoned , was much smaller than previously .
the philistine city of ashkalon was conquered in 604 .
the temple at bethel in benjamin replaced that at jerusalem .
the most significant casualty was the state ideology of zion theology , the idea that the god of israel had chosen jerusalem for his dwelling-place and that the davidic dynasty would reign there forever .
the fall of the city and the end of davidic kingship forced the leaders of the exile community kings , priests , scribes and prophets to reformulate the concepts of community , faith and politics .
the exile community in babylon became the source of significant portions of the hebrew bible : isaiah 40 – 55 ; ezekiel ; the final version of jeremiah ; the work of the hypothesized priestly source in the pentateuch ; and the final form of the history of israel from deuteronomy to 2 kings .
theologically , the babylonian exiles were responsible for the doctrines of individual responsibility and universalism .
the trauma of the exile experience led to the development of a strong sense of hebrew identity distinct from other peoples .
life after the fall of jerusalem probably went on much as it had before .
it may even have improved , as they were rewarded with the land and property of the deportees , much to the anger of the community of exiles remaining in babylon .
the assassination around 582 of the babylonian governor by a disaffected member of the former royal house of david provoked a babylonian crackdown .
when babylon fell to the persian cyrus the great in 539 bce , judah judah judah judah judah judah judah judah seemed to be an administrative division in the persian empire .
cyrus was succeeded as king by cambyses , who added egypt to the empire .
darius introduced a reform of the administrative arrangements of the empire .
after 404 the persians lost control of egypt , which became persia 's main rival outside europe .
yehud 's population over the entire period was probably never more than about 30,000 and that of jerusalem no more than about 1,500 , most of them connected in some way to the temple .
according to the bible , one of the first acts of cyrus , the persian conqueror of babylon , was to commission jewish exiles to return to jerusalem and rebuild their temple .
it was probably not until the middle of the next century , at the earliest , that jerusalem became the capital of judah .
the persians may have experimented initially with ruling yehud as a davidic client-kingdom under descendants of jehoiachin , but by the mid-5th century bce yehud had become a theocracy , ruled by hereditary high priests , with a persian-appointed governor , frequently charged with keeping order and seeing that were paid .
ezra and nehemiah arrived in jerusalem in the middle of the 5th century bce .
the returnees rebuffing the attempt of the " peoples of the land " to participate in the rebuilding of the temple .
during the 5th century bce , ezra and nehemiah attempted to re-integrate these rival factions into a united and ritually pure society .
between 538 and 400 bc , the persian era laid the foundations for the unified judaic religion and the beginning of a scriptural canon .
other important landmarks in this period include the replacement of hebrew as the everyday language of judah by aramaicttered although hebrew continued to be used for religious and literary purposes ; and darius 's reform of the empire 's bureaucracy , which may have led to extensive revisions and reorganizations of the jewish torah .
the israel of the persian period was a group of people who lived in the old kingdom of judah , returnees from the babylonian exile community , mesopotamians who had joined them or had been exiled themselves to samaria at a far earlier period , samaritans , and others .
when alexander died in 323 , his son alexander took over his place as ruler of his empire .
at first , relations between seleucids and jews were cordial , but the attempt of antiochus iv epiphanes arose 174 – 1636 .
the kings of the bible tried to revive the judah described in the bible : a jewish monarchy ruled from jerusalem and including all territories once ruled by david and solomon .
in order to carry out this project , the hasmoneans made one-time moabites , edomites , and ammonites to judaism , as well as the lost kingdom of israel .
he also took control of yehud medinata in 320 .
seleucus found refuge with ptolemy .
demetrius was defeated at the battle of gaza and ptolemy regained control of yehud medinata .
however , not soon after this antigonus came back and ptolemy forced ptolemy to retreat back to egypt .
seleucus was given the areas of syria and palestine , but ptolemy would not give up those lands , causing the syrian wars between the ptolemies and seleucids .
not much is known about the happenings of those in yehud medinata from the time of alexander 's death until the battle of ipsus .
he also allowed them to keep their religious practices , so long as they paid their taxes and didn ’ t rebel .
he was victorious in both the first and second syrian wars , but after trying to end the conflict with the seleucids by arranging a marriage between his daughter berenice and the seleucid king antiochus ii , he died .
in order to enforce his hold on them , he reinforced many cities in palestine and built new ones .
as a result of this , more greeks and macedonians moved to those new cities and brought over their customs and culture , or hellenism .
during the end of the third syrian war , the high priest onias ii would not pay the tax to the ptolemy iii euergetes .
the unified rulers of the region were ptolemy iv philopater and ptolemy v .
he , like the ptolemies , let the jews keep their religion and customs and even went so far as to encourage rebuilding of the temple and city after they welcomed him so warmly into jerusalem .
antiochus owed the romans a great deal of money .
he was informed of this by a rival of the current high priest onias iii .
heliodorus was not allowed into the temple , but it required onias to go explain to the king why one of his ministers was denied access somewhere .
some of these ways were the building of a gymnasium , finding ways to hide their circumcision , and just generally not abiding by the holy covenant .
many jews were not happy with the way hellenism spread into judea .
there is evidence that it was not that simple and that there was negotiation , but lysias still left .
around this time was the dedication of the temple .
however , lysias had to pull out because of a contradiction of who was to be regent for antiochus v . shortly after , both were killed by demetrius i soter who became the new king .
a group of scribes called the hasideans asked him for his word that he would not harm anyone .
he could take back jerusalem .
simon was nominated for the title of high priest , general , and leader by a " great assembly " .
he reached out to rome to have them guarantee that judea would be an independent land .
his last remaining son , john hyrcanus , was supposed to be killed .
he had to pay a large amount of money , tear down the walls of the city , say seleucid power over judea , and help the seleucids fight against the parthians .
this was because of the large number of jews living there .
he defied his father 's wishes that his mother should take over the government and instead had her and all of his brothers except for one thrown in prison .
after his death , he was succeeded by his brother alexander jannaeus .
after alexander janaeaus ' death , his widow became ruler , but not high priest .
the end of the hasmonean dynasty was in 63 when the romans came at the request of the current priest-king aristobulus ii and his competitor hyrcanus ii .
judea became a client-kingdom of rome .
in 40-39 bce herod the great was appointed king of the jews by the roman senate .
henotheism is defined in the dictionary as adherence to one god out of several .
in this period many followers of the israelite religion worshiped the god yahweh .
ashur was the supreme god of all the others .
canaanite religion as a base was natural .
el was the creation god .
during the intermediate stages most people are believed to have been henotheistic .
before the emergence of yahweh as the patron god of the region of ancient israel and judah not all worshiped him alone , or even at all .
religion was very much centered around the family , as opposed to the community .
later , people started to worship yahweh alone and fully convert to monotheistic values .
it can be read about further in the iron age yahwism section below .
many believe that this quote goes to show that the early israelite kingdom followed similar traditions as ancient mesopotamia , where each major urban center had a supreme god .
each culture embraced their patron god , but did not deny the existence of other cultures ' patron gods .
in ancient israel , the patron god was ashur .
some scholars have used the bible as evidence to argue that most of the people alive during the old testament were most likely henotheists .
this quote states that jews and christians should consider yahweh or god the supreme god , incomparable to other supernatural beings .
they have since left lasting impacts on some of the biggest and most widespread religions in our world today .
like the ancient canaanite religion from which it evolved and other religions of the ancient near east , was based on a cult of ancestors and worship of family gods aboard the gods of the gods .
with the emergence of the monarchy at the beginning of iron age ii the kings promoted their family god , yahweh , as the god of the kingdom , but beyond the royal court , religion continued to be both polytheistic and family-centered .
she continued to be popular at a community level until persian times .
yahweh , the national god of both israel and judah , seems to have originated in edom and midian in southern canaan .
scholars believe that the first formative event in the emergence of the distinctive religion described in the bible was triggered by assyria in 722 bc .
this religion was subsequently adopted by the landowners of judah , who in 640 bce placed the eight-year-old josiah on the throne .
judah at this time was a vassal state of assyria , but assyrian power collapsed in the 630s .
according to the deuteronomists , the treaty with yahweh would enable israel 's god to preserve both the city and the king in return for the people 's worship and obedience .
the destruction of jerusalem , its temple , and the davidic dynasty by babylon in 587 / 586 bce was deeply traumatic and led to revisions of the national mythos during the babylonian exile .
judges , samuel and kings interpreted the babylonian destruction as divinely-ordained punishment for the failure of israel 's kings to worship yahweh to the exclusion of all other deities .
strict monotheism emerged among the priests of the temple establishment during the seventh and sixth centuries bce , as did beliefs regarding angels and demons .
most of the biblical literature , including the torah , was written or substantially revised during this time .
