all molecules or ions with a free pair of electrons or at least one pi bond can act as nucleophiles .
nucleophile is a word that comes from nucleus and the greek word φιλος , meaning " love " .
in a row across the periodic table , the more basic the ionizes the pk of the conjugate acid .
within a series of nucleophiles with the same attacking element .
sulfur is a better nucleophile than oxygen .
many schemes try to quantify relative nucleophilic strength have been devised .
the following empirical data have been obtained by measuring reaction rates for a large number of reactions involving a large number of nucleophiles and electrophiles .
nucleophiles displaying the so-called alpha effect are usually omitted in this type of treatment .
the first order reaction rate is called " k " , of a reaction with water as the nucleophile , to a nucleophilic constant " n " for a given nucleophile defined nucleophile .
where formula _ 3 is the nucleophile dependent parameter and formula _ 3 the reaction rate constant for water .
the equation states that two nucleophiles react with the same relative reactivity regardless of the nature of the electrophile , which is in violation of the reactivity – selectivity principle .
for this reason , this equation is also called the " constant selectivity relationship " .
the values for the relative cation reactivities are −0.4 for the malachite green cation , + 2.6 for the benzenediazonium cation , and + 4.5 for the tropylium cation .
the second order reaction rate constant " k " at 20 gdansk for a reaction is related to a nucleophilicity parameter " n " , an electrophilic parameter " e " , and a nucleophile-dependent slope parameter " s " .
typical n values with s in parenthesis are-4.47 couldn for electrophilic aromatic substitution toluenecise 1.32 foley foley .
in short , nucleophilicities towards sp or sp centers follow the same pattern .
examples of nucleophiles are cl , or a compound with a lone pair of electrons .
in the example below , the oxygen of the hydroxide ion donates an electron pair to form a new chemical bond with the carbon at the end of the bromopropane molecule .
because of this backside attack , s2 reactions result in a reversal of the configuration of the electrophile .
an ambident nucleophile is a nucleophile that can attack from two or more places , resulting in two or more products .
for example , the thiocyanate ionials may attack from either the s or the n .
for this reason , the s2 reaction of an alkyl halide with scn often leads to a mixture of an alkyl thiocyanate reacts r-scn edmond and an alkyl isothiocyanateloid r-ncs .
while the halogens aren ' t nucleophilic in their diatomic formocation e . g . i is not a nucleophile burkina faso .
in polar , protic solvents , f is the weakest nucleophile , and i the strongest .
these reagents are often used to perform nucleophilic additions .
enols are ambident nucleophiles , but , in general , nucleophilic at the alpha carbon atom .
examples of oxygen nucleophiles are water cupping , hydroxide anion , alcohols , alkoxide anions , hydrogen peroxide , and carboxylate anions .
of sulfur nucleophiles , hydrogen sulfide and its salts , thiols reacts with the thiols at the end of the season , and anions of dithiocarbonates roocardirdirdi-c-c -rrb- are often used .
in general , sulfur is very nucleophilic because of its large size .