irrelevant conclusion , also known as ignoratio elenchi or missing the point , is a fallacy of presenting an argument that may or may not be valid and sound .
it falls into the broad class of relevance fallacies .
irrelevant conclusion should not be confused with formal fallacy , an argument whose conclusion does not follow from its premises .
ignoratio elenchi is one of the fallacies of aristotle .
in a broader sense he asserted that all fallacies are a form of " ignoratio elenchi " .
for example , a and b are debating as to whether criticizing indirectly has any merit in general .
a attempts to support their position with an argument that politics ought not to be criticized on social media because the message is not being heard by the head of state ; this would make them guilty of " ignoratio elenchi " , as people such as b may be criticizing politics because they have a strong message for their peers , or because they wish to bring directly to the political views , rather than that they wish to be directly read by the president .
for example , a and b are debating about the law .
b missed the point .
the question was not if the law should allow , but if it does or not .
the only thing that matter did not actually exist is " ignoratio elenchi " : during a conversation with boswell , johnson powerfully kicked a stone and proclaimed of berkeley 's theory , " i refute it ! "
this is where she is also " argumentum ad lapidem " .
a red herring is a deliberate attempt to change the subject by changing the argument .
ignoratio elenchi is sometimes confused with straw man argument .
ignoratio elenchi is the phrase " ignoratio elenchi " .
here " elenchi " is the genitive singular of the latin noun " elenchus " , which is .
the translation in english of the latin expression has varied somewhat .
hamblin proposed " misconception of refutation " or " ignorance of refutation " as a literal translation , john arthur oesterle preferred " ignoring the issue " , and irving copi , christopher tindale and others used " irrelevant conclusion " .
