In chemistry, a molecular orbital (MO) is a mathematical function describing the wave-like behavior of an electron in a molecule.
At an elementary level, it is used to describe the "region" of space in which the function has a significant amplitude.
A molecular orbital (MO) can be used to represent the regions in a molecule where an electron occupying that orbital is likely to be found.
Molecular orbitals are obtained from the combination of atomic orbitals, which predict the location of an electron in an atom.
A molecular orbital can specify the electron configuration of a molecule: the spatial distribution and energy of one (or one pair of) electron(s).
Most commonly a MO is represented as a linear combination of atomic orbitals (the LCAO-MO method), especially in qualitative or very approximate usage.
They are invaluable in providing a simple model of bonding in molecules, understood through molecular orbital theory.
Most present-day methods in computational chemistry begin by calculating the MOs of the system.
A molecular orbital describes the behavior of one electron in the electric field generated by the nuclei and some average distribution of the other electrons.
Necessarily this is an approximation, and highly accurate descriptions of the molecular electronic wave function do not have orbitals (see configuration interaction).
In other words, application of a symmetry operation S (e.g., a reflection, rotation, or inversion) to molecular orbital ψ results in the molecular orbital being unchanged or reversing its mathematical sign: Sψ = ±ψ.
The symmetry properties of molecular orbitals means that delocalization is an inherent feature of molecular orbital theory and makes it fundamentally different from (and complementary to) valence bond theory, in which bonds are viewed as localized electron pairs, with allowance for resonance to account for delocalization.
The advantage of this approach is that the orbitals will correspond more closely to the "bonds" of a molecule as depicted by a Lewis structure.
Molecular orbitals arise from allowed interactions between atomic orbitals, which are allowed if the symmetries (determined from group theory) of the atomic orbitals are compatible with each other.
Efficiency of atomic orbital interactions is determined from the overlap (a measure of how well two orbitals constructively interact with one another) between two atomic orbitals, which is significant if the atomic orbitals are close in energy.
Finally, the number of molecular orbitals formed must be equal to the number of atomic orbitals in the atoms being combined to form the molecule.
His ground-breaking paper showed how to derive the electronic structure of the fluorine and oxygen molecules from quantum principles.
Linear combinations of atomic orbitals (LCAO) can be used to estimate the molecular orbitals that are formed upon bonding between the molecule's constituent atoms.
Similar to an atomic orbital, a Schrödinger equation, which describes the behavior of an electron, can be constructed for a molecular orbital as well.
Linear combinations of atomic orbitals, or the sums and differences of the atomic wavefunctions, provide approximate solutions to the Hartree–Fock equations which correspond to the independent-particle approximation of the molecular Schrödinger equation.
For simple diatomic molecules, the wavefunctions obtained are represented mathematically by the equations
where formula_3 and formula_4 are the molecular wavefunctions for the bonding and antibonding molecular orbitals, respectively, formula_5 and formula_6 are the atomic wavefunctions from atoms a and b, respectively, and formula_7 and formula_8 are adjustable coefficients.
As the two atoms become closer together, their atomic orbitals overlap to produce areas of high electron density, and, as a consequence, molecular orbitals are formed between the two atoms.
The number of nodal planes containing the internuclear axis between the atoms concerned is zero for σ MOs, one for π, two for δ, three for φ and four for γ.
An MO will have σ-symmetry if the orbital is symmetric with respect to the axis joining the two nuclear centers, the internuclear axis.
This means that rotation of the MO about the internuclear axis does not result in a phase change.
A σ* orbital, sigma antibonding orbital, also maintains the same phase when rotated about the internuclear axis.
The σ* orbital has a nodal plane that is between the nuclei and perpendicular to the internuclear axis.
An MO will have π symmetry if the orbital is asymmetric with respect to rotation about the internuclear axis.
This means that rotation of the MO about the internuclear axis will result in a phase change.
There is one nodal plane containing the internuclear axis, if real orbitals are considered.
A π* orbital, pi antibonding orbital, will also produce a phase change when rotated about the internuclear axis.
Theoretical chemists have conjectured that higher-order bonds, such as phi bonds corresponding to overlap of f atomic orbitals, are possible.
For molecules that possess a center of inversion (centrosymmetric molecules) there are additional labels of symmetry that can be applied to molecular orbitals.
Non-centrosymmetric molecules include: If inversion through the center of symmetry in a molecule results in the same phases for the molecular orbital, then the MO is said to have gerade (g) symmetry, from the German word for even.
If inversion through the center of symmetry in a molecule results in a phase change for the molecular orbital, then the MO is said to have ungerade (u) symmetry, from the German word for odd.
For a bonding MO with π-symmetry the orbital is π because inversion through the center of symmetry for would produce a sign change (the two p atomic orbitals are in phase with each other but the two lobes have opposite signs), while an antibonding MO with π-symmetry is π because inversion through the center of symmetry for would not produce a sign change (the two p orbitals are antisymmetric by phase).
The qualitative approach of MO analysis uses a molecular orbital diagram to visualize bonding interactions in a molecule.
In this type of diagram, the molecular orbitals are represented by horizontal lines; the higher a line the higher the energy of the orbital, and degenerate orbitals are placed on the same level with a space between them.
Then, the electrons to be placed in the molecular orbitals are slotted in one by one, keeping in mind the Pauli exclusion principle and Hund's rule of maximum multiplicity (only 2 electrons, having opposite spins, per orbital; place as many unpaired electrons on one energy level as possible before starting to pair them).
For more complicated molecules, the wave mechanics approach loses utility in a qualitative understanding of bonding (although is still necessary for a quantitative approach).
Combine SALCs of the same symmetry type from the two fragments, and from N SALCs form N molecular orbitals.
Estimate the relative energies of the molecular orbitals from considerations of overlap and relative energies of the parent orbitals, and draw the levels on a molecular orbital energy level diagram (showing the origin of the orbitals).
For example, in the homonuclear diatomic molecules of the first ten elements, the molecular orbitals derived from the p and the p atomic orbitals result in two degenerate bonding orbitals (of low energy) and two degenerate antibonding orbitals (of high energy).
When the energy difference between the atomic orbitals of two atoms is quite large, one atom's orbitals contribute almost entirely to the bonding orbitals, and the other atom's orbitals contribute almost entirely to the antibonding orbitals.
For example, N, with eight electrons in bonding orbitals and two electrons in antibonding orbitals, has a bond order of three, which constitutes a triple bond.
Although Be has a bond order of 0 according to MO analysis, there is experimental evidence of a highly unstable Be molecule having a bond length of 245 pm and bond energy of 10 kJ/mol.
The highest occupied molecular orbital and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital are often referred to as the HOMO and LUMO, respectively.
As a simple MO example, consider the electrons in a hydrogen molecule, H (see molecular orbital diagram), with the two atoms labelled H' and H".
The lowest-energy atomic orbitals, 1s' and 1s", do not transform according to the symmetries of the molecule.
Because the H molecule has two electrons, they can both go in the bonding orbital, making the system lower in energy (hence more stable) than two free hydrogen atoms.
As with H, the lowest energy atomic orbitals are the 1s' and 1s", and do not transform according to the symmetries of the molecule, while the symmetry adapted atomic orbitals do.
Unlike H, with two valence electrons, He has four in its neutral ground state.
Thus, the resulting electron density around the molecule does not support the formation of a bond between the two atoms; without a stable bond holding the atoms together, molecule would not be expected to exist.
Another way of looking at it is that there are two bonding electrons and two antibonding electrons; therefore, the bond order is 0 and no bond exists (the molecule has one bound state supported by the Van der Waals potential).
Each Li atom contributes three electrons for bonding interactions, and the six electrons fill the three MOs of lowest energy, σ(1s), σ*(1s), and σ(2s).
Considering a hypothetical molecule of He, since the basis set of atomic orbitals is the same as in the case of H, we find that both the bonding and antibonding orbitals are filled, so there is no energy advantage to the pair.
HeH would have a slight energy advantage, but not as much as H + 2 He, so the molecule is very unstable and exists only briefly before decomposing into hydrogen and helium.
In general, we find that atoms such as He that have full energy shells rarely bond with other atoms.
Orbital interactions to produce bonding or antibonding orbitals in heteronuclear diatomics occur if there is sufficient overlap between atomic orbitals as determined by their symmetries and similarity in orbital energies.
In hydrogen fluoride HF overlap between the H 1s and F 2s orbitals is allowed by symmetry but the difference in energy between the two atomic orbitals prevents them from interacting to create a molecular orbital.
Overlap between the H 1s and F 2p orbitals is also symmetry allowed, and these two atomic orbitals have a small energy separation.
Since HF is a non-centrosymmetric molecule, the symmetry labels g and u do not apply to its molecular orbitals.
To obtain quantitative values for the molecular energy levels, one needs to have molecular orbitals that are such that the configuration interaction (CI) expansion converges fast towards the full CI limit.
One usually solves this problem by expanding the molecular orbitals as linear combinations of Gaussian functions centered on the atomic nuclei (see linear combination of atomic orbitals and basis set (chemistry)).
There are a number of programs in which quantum chemical calculations of MOs can be performed, including Spartan and HyperChem.
Simple accounts often suggest that experimental molecular orbital energies can be obtained by the methods of ultra-violet photoelectron spectroscopy for valence orbitals and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy for core orbitals.