september is the ninth month of the year in the gregorian calendar , coming between may and july .
in the northern hemisphere , september is the seasonal equivalent of march in the other hemispheres .
in the northern hemisphere , the beginning of the summer is on september 1 .
in the southern hemisphere , the spring is september 1 .
september is the beginning of the church 's ecclesiastical year .
it is the start of the academic year in many countries of the northern hemisphere .
septemberaurus was the seventh month of the year , and the year was used for the roman calendar .
after the calendar reform that added january and february to the beginning of the year , september became the ninth month , but kept its name .
it had 29 days until the julian reform , which added a day .
ancient roman observances for september include ludi romani , which was first celebrated on september 12 , later , later extended to september 5 to september 19 .
in the 1st century bc , an extra day was added in honor of the deified julius caesar on september 4 .
it was held on september 13 .
ludi triumphales was held from september 18 to 22 .
the septimontium was celebrated in september , and december 11 , on later calendars .
these dates do not match the modern gregorian calendar .
in 1752 the british empire adopted the gregorian calendar .
in the british empire that year , september 2 was followed by september 14 .
september was called " harvest month " in charlemagne 's calendar .
september corresponds partly to the fructidor and partly to the vendemiaire of the first french republic .
on usenet , it is said that september 1993 ( eternal septemberrford never ended .
september is called " herbstmonat " , harvest month , in switzerland .
the anglo-saxons called the month " gerstmonath " , barley month , that crop being then usually harvested .
meteor showers that occur in september include the delta aurigids , which occur from mid-september to early october , the southern taurids , which occur from september 10 to november 20 , and the andromedids from september 25 to december 25 .
the september equinox happens in this month .
it is the autumn equinox in the northern hemisphere , and the vernal equinox in the southern hemisphere .
the dates can vary from 21 september to 24 september paces .
september is mostly in the sixth month of the astrological calendar appearing and the first part of the seventhement , which begins at the end of march / aries .
" this list does not necessarily imply either official status or general observance . "
