the european charter for regional or minority languages is a european treaty signed in 1992 .
the planning for the charter was undertaken by the predecessor to the current congress of local and regional authorities , the standing conference of local and regional authorities of europe because the involvement of local and regional government was essential .
the charter was written in the parliamentary assembly .
it only applies to languages traditionally used by the nationals of the state parties , but not all languages used by recent immigrants from other states .
some states , such as ukraine and sweden , have tied the status of minority language to the national minorities .
languages that are official within regions , provinces or federal units within a stateline are not official languages of the state .
but a minority language is defined as the first official language of the state .
the united kingdom has ratified the charter in respect to welsh in wales , scotland , and northern ireland .
france , although a signatory , has been blocked from ratifying the charter in respect to the languages of france .
the charter provides a large number of different actions state parties can take to protect and promote historical regional and minority languages .
there are two levels of protection .
signatories may also say that a qualifying language or languages will benefit from the higher level of protection .
countries can ratify the charter in respect of its minority languages based on part ii or part iii of the charter , which contain varying principles .
countries can treat languages differently under the charter , for example , in the united kingdom , the welsh language is ratified under the general part ii principles .
part ii of the charter is about eight main principles and goals on which states must base their policies and legislation .
they are seen as a framework for the preservation of the languages concerned .
part iii says that the states agree to abide .
each part iii of the charter must be named specifically by the government .
states must select at least thirty-five of the undertakings in respect to each language .
many of the provisions contain several options , of varying degrees of stringency , one of which has to be chosen “ according to the situation of each language ” .
