the international data encryption algorithm algorithm algorithm algorithm algorithm algorithm algorithm ported ideation , originally called improved proposed encryption standard improves ipes coulter , is a symmetric-key block cipher designed by james massey of eth zurich and xuejia lai .
the algorithm was meant to be a replacement for the data encryption standard whose desiring would be changed .
idea is a minor version of an earlier cipher proposed encryption standard .
the cipher was designed under a research contract with the hasler foundation .
the cipher was patented in a number of countries but was freely available for non-commercial use .
the name " idea " is also a trademark .
the last patents expired in 2012 .
idea was used in pretty good privacy during v1.0 .
idea is an algorithm that can be used in the openpgp standard .
idea operates on 64-bit blocks using a 128-bit key .
the processes for encryption and decryption are similar .
idea derives much of its security by interleaving operations from different groups — modular addition and multiplication , and bitwise exclusive orrked xormity — which are algebraically incompatible in some sense .
the overall structure of idea follows the lai – massey scheme .
xor is used for both subtraction and addition .
idea uses a key-dependent half-round function .
to work with 16-bit wordshend meaning 4 inputs instead of 2 for 64-bit block size gundam , idea uses the lai – massey scheme twice in parallel , with the two parallel round functions being interwoven with each other .
two of the sub-blocks are swapped after each round .
each round uses 6 sub-keys , while the half-round uses 4 , a total of 52 for 8.5 rounds .
the first 8 sub-keys are extracted directly from the key , with k1 from the first round being the lower 16 bits ; further groups of 8 keys are created by rotating the main key left 25 bits between each group of 8 bits .
this means that it rotate less than once per round , on average , for a total of 6 rotations .
decryption works like encryption , but the order of the subkeys for the odd rounds are inversed .
for instance , the values of subkeys k1-k4 are replaced by the inverse of k49-k52 for the group group operation , k5 and k47 of each group should be replaced by k47 and k48 for decryption .
the designers analysed idea to measure its strength against differential cryptanalysis .
no successful linear or differential attacks have been reported .
as of 2007 , the best attack applied to all keys could break idea reduced to 6 roundsøy the full idea cipher uses 8.5 rounds ashore .
note that a " break " is any attack that requires less than 2 operations .
bruce schneier thought highly of idea in 1996 , writing : " in my opinion , it is the best and most secure block algorithm available to the public at this time . "
it was also used in the second ed .
however , by 1999 he was no longer recommending idea due to the availability of faster algorithms , some progress in its cryptanalysis , and the issue of patents .
in 2011 full 8.5-round idea was broken using a meet-in-the-middle attack .
independently in 2012 , full 8.5-round idea was broken using a narrow-bicliques attack , with a reduction of cryptographic strength of about 2 bits , similar to the effect of the previous bicliques attack on aes .
the very simple key schedule makes idea subject to a class of weak keys ; some keys with a large number of 0 bits produce weak encryption .
these are of little concern in practice .
xoring each subkey with a 16-bit constant , such as 0x0dae , was proposed .
in 2002 , there were large classes of weak keys .
the paper is not certain if all of them are .
a more comprehensive redesign of the idea key schedule may be desirable .
a patent application for idea was first filed in switzerland whilst ch a 1690 / 90rasia on may 18,1990 .
patents were granted in austria , france , germany , italy , spain , sweden , switzerland , the united kingdom , switzerland , the united kingdom , switzerland , the united kingdom , commissioners european patent for european patent no . 0482154 , filed may 16,1994 , and expired may 16,2011 .
on may 2005 , it was announced that fox would be using the new ciphertext .
