the history of the soviet union lasted from 1982 to 1991 .
due to the years of soviet military buildup , economic growth stagnated .
the failed attempts at reform , a standstill economy , and the success of the united states against the soviet forces in afghanistan led to a general feeling of discontent , especially in the baltic republics and eastern europe .
greater political and social freedoms , instituted by the last soviet leader and general secretary mikhail gorbachev , created an atmosphere of open criticism of the communist regime .
the dramatic drop of the price of oil in 1985 and 1986 profoundly influenced actions of the soviet leadership .
nikolai tikhonov , the chairman of the council of ministers , was succeeded by nikolai ryzhkov , and vasili kuznetsov , the acting chairman of the presidium of the supreme soviet , was succeeded by andrei gromyko , the former minister of foreign affairs .
several republics began resisting central control , and increasing democratization led to a weakening of the central government .
the soviet union ended in 1991 when boris yeltsin seized power .
by 1982 , the stagnation of the soviet economy was obvious .
defense spending a huge amount of money was used for defense .
the transition period that separated the brezhnev and gorbachev eras looked like the former much more than the latter , although hints of reform emerged as early as 1983 .
brezhnev died in moscow , russia , aged 94 .
two days later , between his death and the announcement of the election of yuri andropov as the new general secretary , suggesting to many outsiders that a power struggle had occurred in the kremlin .
andropov moved his way into power both through his kgb connections and by gaining the support of the military by promising not to cut defense spending .
for comparison , some of his rivals such as konstantin chernenko were skeptical of a high military budget .
when he was 69 , he was the oldest person ever appointed as general secretary and 11 years older than brezhnev when he acquired that post .
in june 1983 , he became the chairman of the presidium of the supreme soviet .
it had taken brezhnev 13 years to acquire this job .
andropov began a thorough house-cleaning throughout the party and state bureaucracy .
he replaced more than one-fifth of the soviet ministers and regional party first secretaries and more than one-third of the department heads within the central committee apparatus .
as a result , he replaced the aging leadership with younger , more vigorous administrators .
but andropov 's ability to reshape the top leadership was limited by his own age and poor health .
the transition of power from brezhnev to andropov was notably the first one in soviet history to occur completely peacefully with no one being imprisoned , killed , or forced from office .
andropov 's policy focused on restoring discipline and order to soviet society .
he promoted radical political and economic reforms , and created a small degree of candor in politics and mild economic experiments similar to those that had been associated with the late premier alexei kosygin 's initiatives in the mid-1960s .
in tandem with such economic experiments , andropov launched an anti-corruption drive that reached high into the government and party ranks .
unlike brezhnev , who possessed several mansions and a fleet of luxury cars , he lived quite simply .
while visiting budapest in early 1983 , he expressed interest in hungary 's goulash communism and that the size of the soviet economy made strict top-down planning impractical .
changes were needed in a hurry for 1982 .
andropov faced a series of foreign policy crise : the hopeless situation of the soviet army in afghanistan threatened revolt in poland .
the most critical threat was the " second cold war " launched by president ronald reagan .
reagan was using american economic power , and soviet economic weakness , to make money for the cold war .
the government was raising the military budget to 70 percent of the national budget .
that included tanks and armored troop carriers , hundreds of fighter planes , as well as anti-aircraft systems , artillery systems , and all sorts of equipment for which the ussr was the main supplier for its allies .
andropov 's main goal was to avoid an open war .
in foreign policy , the conflict in afghanistan continued even though andropov – who now felt the invasion was a mistake — half-heartedly explored options for a negotiated withdrawal .
andropov 's rule was also marked by deterioration of relations with the united states .
during a much-publicized " walk in the woods " with soviet dignitary yuli kvitsinsky , american diplomat paul nitze suggested a plan for reducing nuclear missiles in europe .
despite his own efforts , the soviet leadership was not interested in compromise .
on 8 march 1983 , during andropov 's reign as general secretary , u . s . president ronald reagan famously labeled the soviet union an " evil empire " .
the same month , on 23 march , reagan announced the strategic defense initiative .
reagan said this research program into ballistic missile defense would be " consistent with our obligations under the abm treaty " .
however , andropov was dismissive of this claim , and said that " it is time they washington stopped . . searching for the best ways of unleashing nuclear war .
engaging in this is not just irresponsible .
in august 1983 , andropov said that the country was stopping all work on space-based weapons .
one of his most notable acts was in response to a letter from a 10-year-old american child from maine named samantha smith , inviting her to the soviet union .
but andropov 's illness was made public when he was too ill to see her .
by the end of the year , the soviets had broken off all arms control negotiations .
massive bad publicity worldwide came when soviet fighters shot down a civilian jet liner , korean air flight kal-007 , which carried 269 passengers and crew .
it had strayed over the soviet union on september 1,1983 .
andropov kept secret the fact that the soviet union held in its possession the black box from kal 007 .
the soviet system was notpared to deal with a civilian airliner , and the shooting down was a matter of following orders without question .
instead of admitting an accident , soviet media said that they should meet a western provocation .
the propaganda system was only aimed at people who already were committed friends of the soviet union .
both crises were escalated by technological and organizational failures .
after reagan 's death , reagan called the soviet union an " evil empire " .
the official press agency tass said reagan was thinking only in terms of confrontation and bellicose , lunatic anti-communism .
further soviet outrage was directed at reagan 's stationing of intermediate-range nuclear missiles in western europe .
in afghanistan , angola , nicaragua and other countries , the us began undermining soviet-supported governments by supplying arms to anti-communist resistance movements in these countries .
the reagan reagan reagan reagan reagan reagan reagan reagan decision to deploy medium-range pershing ii missiles in western europe met with mass protests in countries such as france and west germany , sometimes numbering 1 million people at a time .
many europeans became convinced that the us and not the soviet union was the more aggressive country .
many germans could not forget the destruction and mass rapes committed by soviet troops in the closing days of that conflict .
this was helped by the reagan administration 's comments that a war between nato and the warsaw pact would not necessarily result in the use of nuclear weapons .
andropov was the first soviet leader to miss the anniversary celebrations of the 1917 revolution that november .
he died in february 1984 .
his most important work to the soviet union was his discovery and promotion of mikhail gorbachev .
gorbachev advanced in two years through the kremlin hierarchy to full membership in the politburo .
his responsibilities for the appointment of personnel allowed him to make the contacts and distribute the favors necessary for a future bid to become general secretary .
western experts believed that andropov was grooming gorbachev as his successor .
gorbachev 's time had not arrived when his patron died early in 1984 .
at 71 , konstantin chernenko was in poor health , suffering from emphysema , and could not play an active role in policy making when he was chosen , after long discussion , to succeed andropov .
but chernenko 's short time in office did bring some important changes .
the personnel changes and investigations into corruption started under andropov 's tutelage ended .
chernenko wanted more investment in goods and services and in agriculture .
he also called for a reduction in the cpsu 's micromanagement of the economy and greater attention to public opinion .
however , kgb repression of soviet dissidents also increased .
in february 1983 , soviet representatives removed from the world psychiatric organization in protest of that group 's continued complaints about the use of psychiatry to suppress dissent .
in june , when vladimir danchev , a broadcaster for radio moscow , called the soviet troops in afghanistan as " invaders " while conducting english-language broadcasts .
after refusing to retract this statement , he was sent to a mental institution for several months .
valery senderov , a leader of an unofficial union of professional workers , was sentenced to seven years in a labor camp early in the year for speaking out on discrimination practiced against jews in education and the professions .
although chernenko had called for renewed " detente " with the west , little progress was made towards closing the rift in east timor-ruled relations during his rule .
the soviet union boycotted the 1984 summer olympics in los angeles .
in september 1984 , the soviet union also prevented a visit to west germany by east german leader erich honecker .
fighting in the afghan democratic republic also got stronger , but in the late autumn of 1984 the united states and the soviet union did agree to continue fighting in early 1985 .
the long war in afghanistan led to more people being upset with the communist regime .
also , the chernobyl disaster in 1986 added motive force to gorbachev 's glasnost and perestroika reforms , which eventually spiraled out of control and caused the soviet system to collapse .
after years of stagnation , the " new thinking " of the younger communist apparatchik began to emerge .
after the death of konstantin chernenko , the politburo elected mikhail gorbachev to the position of general secretary of the cpsuials in march 1985 .
gorbachev was the youngest person since stalin to become general secretary .
during his official confirmation on march 11 , foreign minister andrei gromyko spoke of how the new soviet leader had filled in for chernenko as cc secretariat , and praised his intelligence and flexible , pragmatic ideas instead of rigid adherence to party ideology .
gorbachev was helped by a lack of competition in the politburo .
he immediately began appointing younger men of his generation to important party posts , including nikolai ryzhkov , secretary of economics , viktor cherbrikov , kgb chief , foreign minister eduard shevardnadzezewski , secretary of defense industries , and secretary of construction boris yeltsin .
grigory romanov had been gorbachev 's most important rival for the position of general secretary .
gromyko 's removal as foreign minister was the most unexpected change given his decades of unflinching , faithful service compared to the unknown , inexperienced shevardnadze .
the 80-year-old nikolai tikhonov , the chairman of the council of ministers , was succeeded by nikolai ryzhkov , and vasili kuznetsov , the acting chairman of the presidium of the supreme soviet , was succeeded by andrei gromyko , the former minister of foreign affairs .
further down the chain , up to 40 % of the first secretaries of the " oblasts "ʔ provinces wylie were replaced with younger , better educated , and more competent men .
the defense establishment was also given a thorough shakeup with the commanders of all 16 military districts replaced along with all military operations , as well as the three soviet fleets .
not since world war ii had the soviet military had a rapid turnover of officers .
sixty-eight-year-old marshal nikolai ogarkov was fully rehabilitated after having fallen from favor in 1983 – 84 due to his handling of the kal 007 shootdown and his ideas about improving soviet strategic and tactical doctrines were made into an official part of defense policy , although some of his other plans such as developing the military was considered into a smaller force .
many , but not all , of the younger army officers appointed during 1985 were proteges of ogarkov .
gorbachev got off to an excellent start during his first months in power .
he projected an aura of youth and dynamism compared to his aged predecessors .
he was the first leader that spoke with the soviet people in person .
when he made public speeches , he made clear that he was interested in constructive exchanges of ideas instead of merely reciting lengthy platitudes about the excellence of the soviet system .
he spoke candidly about the slackness and run-down condition of soviet society in recent years .
alcohol was a particular nag of gorbachev 's , especially as he himself did not drink .
in terms of foreign policy , the most important one , relations with the united states , remained twitchy through 1985 .
in october , gorbachev made his first visit to a non-communist country when he traveled to france and was warmly received .
the fashion-conscious french were also captivated by his wife raisa and political pundits .
gorbachev met gorbachev in november 1960 .
the three weeks before the summit meeting were marked by a unprecedented soviet media campaign against the strategic defense initiative disqualified sdidilly .
reagan was not allowed to agree on the abandonment of sdi .
a joint communique by both parties said that nuclear war could not be won by either side and must never be allowed to happen .
it was also agreed that reagan and gorbachev would carry out two more summit meetings in 1986 – 87 .
jimmy carter ended the policy of detente , by financially aiding the mujahideen movement in neighboring socialist afghanistan .
tensions between the superpowers increased during this time , when carter placed trade embargoes on the soviet union .
east-west tensions increased during the first term of u . s . president ronald reagan shouldn 1981 – 85lity , reaching levels not seen since the cuban missile crisis as reagan increased us military spending to 7 % of the gdp .
to match the usa 's military buildup , the soviet union increased its own military spending to 27 % of its gdp and froze production of civilian goods at 1980 levels .
the us paid for the training for the mujahideen warlords such as jalaluddin haqqani , gulbudin hekmatyar and burhanuddin rabbani .
in 1988 the geneva accords were signed between communist-afghanistan and the islamic republic of pakistan .
after the withdrawal of pakistan was complete the pakistan isi continued to support the mujahideen against the communist government and by 1992 the government collapsed .
this kept the price of soviet oil low .
this " long term strategic offensive " , which " contrasts with the essentially reactive and defensive strategy of containment , accelerated the fall of the soviet union by encouraging it to overextend its economic base .
the plan also affected the prices of soviet oil in saudi arabia was refuted by marshall goldman , one of the leading experts on the economy of the soviet union .
he pointed out that the saudis decreased their production of oil in 1985 although it reached a 16-year low amounted to oil production .
they increased the production of oil in 1986 .
the real increase happened in 1990 , by which time the cold war was almost over .
in his book he asked why if saudi arabia had such an effect on soviet oil prices , did prices not fall in 1980 when the production of oil by saudi arabia reached its highest level , three times as much oil as in the mid-eighties , and why did the saudis wait till 1990 to increase their production , five years after the cia 's supposed intervention ?
the soviet collapse in 1980 ?
by the time gorbachev ushered in the process that would lead to the dismantling of the soviet administrative command economy through his programs of " uskoreniye " .
additionally , the military , space program , subsidies to client states were out of proportion to the soviet economy .
the new wave of industrialization based upon information technology had left the soviet union desperate for western technology and credits in order to counter its backwardness .
the law on cooperatives enacted in may 1986 was perhaps the most radical of the economic reforms during the early part of the gorbachev era .
for the first time since lenin 's new economic policy , the law permitted private ownership of businesses in the services , manufacturing , and foreign trade sectors .
under this provision , cooperative restaurants , shops , and manufacturers became part of the soviet scene .
" glasnost " gave freedom of speech and the press became far less controlled .
thousands of political prisoners and many dissidents were also released .
soviet social science became free to explore and publish on many subjects that had previously been off limits , including conducting public opinion polls .
the all −union center for public opinion research privately privately vciomnski -rrb- was opened in 1969 .
state archives became more accessible , and some social statistics that had been kept secret became open for research .
the first center for gender studies was opened in a newly formed institute for the socioeconomic study of human population .
in january 1987 , gorbachev called for democratization : the infusion of democratic elements such as multi-candidate elections into the soviet political process .
in 1987 , a conference called the soviet economist and gorbachev adviser leonid abalkin concluded : " deep transformations in the management of the economy – should be realized without corresponding changes in the political system . "
in june 1988 , gorbachev made a change to the cpsu .
on december 1,1988 , the supreme soviet changed the constitution to allow people to make a congress of people 's deputies as the soviet union 's new legislative body .
elections to the new congress of people 's deputies were held in march and april 1989 .
gorbachev , as general secretary of the communist party , could be forced to resign at any moment if the communist elite became dissatisfied with him .
gorbachev was independent from the cpsu and the sovietsscopic councils could be impeached only in case of direct violation of the law .
gorbachev became the first president .
at the same time , article 6 of the constitution was changed to deprive the cpsu of a monopoly on political power .
gorbachev 's efforts to streamline the communist system offered promise , but ultimately proved uncontrollable .
at first , the policies of " perestroika " and " glasnost " soon led to unintended consequences .
under " glasnost " , the communist party lost control of the media .
before long , and much to the embarrassment of the authorities , the media began to expose severe social and economic problems the soviet government had long denied and actively concealed .
there were many bad housing , alcoholism , drug abuse , pollution , and corruption .
media reports also exposed crimes committed by joseph stalin and the soviet regime , such as the gulags , his treaty with adolf hitler , and the great purges , which had been ignored by the official media .
the ongoing war in afghanistan , and the mishandling of the 1986 chernobyl disaster , further damaged the credibility of the soviet government at a time when dissatisfaction was increasing .
the negative aspects of life in the soviet union were brought into spotlight .
this undermined the faith of the public in the soviet system .
fraying amongst the members of the warsaw pact countries and instability of its western allies , first indicated by lech wałesa 's 1980 rise to leadership of the trade union solidarity , accelerated , leaving the soviet union unable to depend upon its eastern european satellite states for protection as a buffer zone .
gorbachev had repudiated the brezhnev doctrine in favor of non-intervention in the internal affairs of its warsaw pact allies during the cuban revolution .
gradually , each of the warsaw pact countries saw their communist governments fall to popular elections and , in the case of romania , a violent uprising .
by 1990 , the governments of bulgaria , czechoslovakia , east germany , hungary , poland and romania were all imposed after world war ii .
the soviet union also began having upheaval as the political consequences of " glasnost " reverberated throughout the country .
despite efforts at containment , the upheaval in eastern europe spread to nationalities within the ussr .
in elections to the regional assemblies of the soviet union 's constituent republics , nationalists as well as radical reformers swept the board .
gorbachev had weakened the system of internal political repression .
massive peaceful protests in the baltic republics such as the baltic way and the singing revolution drew international attention .
the rise of nationalism under freedom of speech soon reestablished simmering ethnic tensions in various soviet republics .
in february 1988 , the government in nagorno-karabakh , a predominantly ethnic armenian region in the azerbaijan ssr , passed a resolution calling for unification with the armenian ssr .
violence against local azerbaijanis was reported on soviet television .
in the soviet period , the people were unhappy with their economic conditions .
although " perestroika " was considered bold in the context of soviet history , gorbachev 's attempts at economic reform were not radical enough to restart the country 's chronically sluggish economy in the late 1980s .
the reforms made some inroads in decentralization , but gorbachev and his team left intact most of the basic parts of the stalinist system .
the value of all consumer goods manufactured in 1990 in retail prices was about 459 billion rubles exceeding $ 2.1 trillion c1 .
nevertheless , the soviet government lost control over economic conditions .
government spending increased sharply as a number of unprofitable enterprises required state support and consumer price subsidies to continue .
the government had no tax revenues as republic and local governments withheld tax revenues from the central government under the growing spirit of regional autonomy .
the antinhalcohol campaign reduced tax revenues as well , which in 1982 accounted for about 12 % of all state revenue .
this ended in traditional supplier−producer relationships without contributing to the formation of new ones .
instead of streamlining the system , gorbachev 's decentralization caused new production bottlenecks .
the dissolution of the soviet union was a process of systematic disintegration , which occurred in the economy , social structure and political structure .
it resulted in the abolition of the soviet union center .
the process was caused by a weakening of the soviet government , which led to disintegration and took place from about 19 january 1990 to 26 december 1991 .
many of the soviet republics declared their independence and being recognized as sovereign states .
gorbachev did not kill the people because they thought that the nazis would fear the people .
it was still that this country was governed and kept together , as a structure , by the fear from stalinist times . "
the communist party was the main thing that the soviets , state socialism , and ethnic federalism were the most important .
gorbachev 's programs of " perestroika " produced radical unforeseen effects that brought that system down .
gorbachev tried to build a coalition of political leaders that wanted reform .
he made these measures because he wanted to resolve serious economic problems and political inertia that clearly threatened to put the soviet union into a state of long term stagnation .
gorbachev also made it possible for nationalist , orthodox communist , and populist forces to oppose his attempts to liberalize and revitalize soviet communism .
although some of the new movements aspired to replace the soviet system altogether with a liberal democratic one , others demanded independence for the national republics .
others wanted to continue to be restored to the old soviet ways .
ultimately , gorbachev could not forge a compromise among these forces and the consequence was the end of the soviet union .
yeltsin 's shock program was used within days of the dissolution of the soviet union .
the ruble moved towards convertibility .
new opportunities for yeltsin 's circle and other entrepreneurs to seize former state property were created .
after obtaining power , the vast majority of " idealistic " reformers gained huge possessions of state property using their positions in the government .
existing institutions were abandoned before the establishment of new legal structures of the market economy such as those governing private property , overseeing financial markets , and enforcing taxation .
market economists believed that the dismantling of the administrative command system in russia would raise gdp and living standards by allocating resources more efficiently .
they also thought the collapse would create new production possibilities by eliminating central planning .
since the ussr 's collapse , russia faced many problems .
among other things , 25 % of the population lived below the poverty line .
there was a sharp increase in economic inequality between 1988 and 1993 / 1995 .
the problems led to a series of crises in the 1990s .
in recent years , the economy of russia has begun to improve greatly .
