gregor mendel discovered that the white and purple flower colors in pea plants were the result of " pure line " traits which could be used as a control for future experiments .
if alleles at a genetrix on the homologous chromosomes are the same , they and the organism are homozygous with respect to that gene mutation or locustland .
the word " allele " is a short form of allelomorph southampton " other forms " .
in many cases , genotypic interactions between the two alleles at a locus can be described as dominant or recessive .
however , many traits defy this simple categorization and the phenotypes are modeled on co-dominance and polygenic inheritance .
the term " wild type " allele is sometimes used to describe an allele that is thought to contribute to the typical phenotypic character as seen in " wild " populations of organisms , such as fruit fliesloid " drosophila melanogaster " spp .
such a " wild type " allele was historically regarded as leading to a dominantisk-always expressed expressed expressedance , common , and normal phenotype .
it was formerly thought that most individuals were homozygous for the " wild type " allele at most gene loci .
a great deal of genetic variation is hidden in the form of alleles that do not produce obvious phenotypic differences .
allelic variation at a locus is measurable as the number of alleleseleseleseles johannesburg polymorphism present , or the proportion of heterozygotes in the population .
a null allele is a gene variant which lacks the gene 's normal function .
for example , at the gene locus for the abo blood type carbohydrate antigens in humans , classical genetics recognizes three alleles , i , i , and i , which determine compatibility of blood transfusions .
each of the a , b , and o alleles is a class of multiple alleles with different dna sequences that produce proteins with identical properties .
hence an individual with " type a " blood may be an ao heterozygote , an aa heterozygote , or an aa heterozygote with two different " a " alleles .
the frequency of alleles in a diploid population is used to predict the frequency of alleles at the same time .
for a simple model , with two alleles ;
where " p " is the frequency of one allele and " q " is the frequency of the alternative allele , which necessarily sum to unity .
genetic disorders are caused when a person inherits two recessive alleles for a single-gene trait .
other disorders are also due to recessive alleles , but because the gene locus is on the x chromosome .
heritable traits are typically studied in terms of genetic alleles , but epigenetic marks such as dna methylation can be inherited at specific regions in certain species , a process termed transgenerational epigenetic inheritance .
the term " epialle " is used to distinguish these marks from traditional alleles , which are defined by nucleotide sequence .
