Parchment is another term for this material, and if vellum is distinguished from this, it is by vellum being made from calfskin, as opposed to that from other animals, or otherwise being of higher quality.
Depending on factors such as the method of preparation it may be very hard to determine the animal species involved (let alone its age) without using a laboratory, and the term avoids the need to distinguish between vellum and parchment.
Vellum is generally smooth and durable, although there are great variations depending on preparation and the quality of the skin.
The manufacture involves the cleaning, bleaching, stretching on a frame (a "herse"), and scraping of the skin with a crescent-shaped knife (a "lunarium" or "lunellum").
A final finish may be achieved by abrading the surface with pumice, and treating with a preparation of lime or chalk to make it accept writing or printing ink.
Modern "paper vellum" is made of synthetic plant material, and is called such for its usage and quality similarities.
In Europe, from Roman times, the term "vellum" was used for the best quality of prepared skin, regardless of the animal from which the hide was obtained, calf, sheep, and goat all being commonly used (other animals, including pig, deer, donkey, horse, or camel have been used).
The best quality, "uterine vellum", was said to be made from the skins of stillborn or unborn animals, although the term was also applied to fine quality skins made from young animals.
In 1519, William Horman could write in his "Vulgaria": "That stouffe that we wrytte upon, and is made of beestis skynnes, is somtyme called parchement, somtyme velem, somtyme abortyve, somtyme membraan."
French sources, closer to the original etymology, tend to define "velin" as from calf only, while the British Standards Institution defines parchment as made from the split skin of several species, and vellum from the unsplit skin.
In the usage of modern practitioners of the artistic crafts of writing, illuminating, lettering, and bookbinding, "vellum" is normally reserved for calfskin, while any other skin is called "parchment".
The hair follicles may be visible on the outer side, together with any scarring made while the animal was alive.
The maker then uses a crescent shaped knife, (a "lunarium" or "lunellum"), to clean off any remaining hairs.
Once the skin is completely dry, it is thoroughly cleaned and processed into sheets.
For example, the average calfskin can provide three and half medium sheets of writing material.
Historians have found evidence of manuscripts where the scribe wrote down the medieval instructions now followed by modern membrane makers.
The membrane is then rubbed with a round, flat object ("pouncing") to ensure that the ink would adhere well.
They note "'pricking' is the process of making holes in a sheet of parchment (or membrane) in preparation of its ruling.
The lines were then made by ruling between the prick marks...The process of entering ruled lines on the page to serve as a guide for entering text.
Most manuscripts were ruled with horizontal lines that served as the baselines on which the text was entered and with vertical bounding lines that marked the boundaries of the columns".
Most of the finer sort of medieval manuscripts, whether illuminated or not, were written on vellum.
A quarter of the 180 copy edition of Johannes Gutenberg's first Bible printed in 1455 with movable type was also printed on vellum, presumably because his market expected this for a high-quality book.
In art, vellum was used for paintings, especially if they needed to be sent long distances, before canvas became widely used in about 1500, and continued to be used for drawings, and watercolours.
Limp vellum or limp-parchment bindings were used frequently in the 16th and 17th centuries, and were sometimes gilt but were also often not embellished.
In later centuries vellum has been more commonly used like leather, that is, as the covering for stiff board bindings.
Lasting in excess of 1,000 years—Gregory the Great, Pastoral Care (Troyes, Bibliothèque Municipale, MS 504), for example dates from about 600 and is in excellent condition—animal vellum can be far more durable than paper.
For this reason, many important documents are written on animal vellum, such as diplomas.
Referring to a diploma as a "sheepskin" alludes to the time when diplomas were written on vellum made from animal hides.
In February 2016, the UK House of Lords announced that legislation would be printed on archive paper instead of the traditional vellum from April 2016.
Today, because of low demand and complicated manufacturing process, animal vellum is expensive and hard to find.
Known as paper vellum, this material is considerably cheaper than animal vellum and can be found in most art and drafting supply stores.
It is also used on instruments such as the banjo and the bodhran, although synthetic skins are also available for these instruments.
It is more dimensionally stable than a linen or paper sheet, which is frequently critical in the development of large scaled drawings such as blueprints.
Paper vellum had also become extremely important in hand or chemical reproduction technology for dissemination of plan copies.
Like a high-quality traditional vellum, paper vellum could be produced thin enough to be virtually transparent to strong light, enabling a source drawing to be used directly in the reproduction of field-used drawings.
Vellum is ideally stored in a stable environment with constant temperature and 30% (± 5%) relative humidity.
If vellum is stored in an environment with less than 11% relative humidity, it becomes fragile, brittle, and susceptible to mechanical stresses; if it is stored in an environment with greater than 40% relative humidity, it becomes vulnerable to gelation and to mold or fungus growth.