fat is one of the three main types of nutrient .
fat is made up of mainly carbon and hydrogen atoms .
examples are cholesterol , phospholipids , and triglycerides .
the term lipid refers to the fact that fat is often confused with fat .
lipid is the general term , though a lipid is not necessarily a triglyceride .
fat is used in the strict sense of lipid , but fat is used in food science .
fat is an important food for many forms of life , and fats serve both structural and metabolic functions .
they are a necessary part of the diet of most heterotrophs including humans measurements .
some fatty acids are essential because they produce in the body from simpler constituents .
there are two essential fatty acids : alpha-linolenic acid rankine -lrb- omega-3 fatty acid rankine -rrb- and linoleic acid rankine .
other lipids needed by the body can be made from these and other fats .
fats and other lipids are broken down in the body by enzymes called lipases produced in the pancreas .
fats and oils are categorized according to the number and bonding of the carbon atoms in the aliphatic chain .
fats that are saturated fats have no double bonds between the carbons in the chain .
the two are double bonded to one carbon chain .
the nomenclature is based on the non-carbonylocks end of the chain .
this end is called the omega end or the n-end .
thus alpha-linolenic acid is called an omega-3 fatty acid .
some oils and fats have multiple double bonds and are therefore called polyunsaturated fats .
unsaturated fats can be divided into cis fats , which are the most common in nature , and trans fats , which are rare in nature .
it can be changed by changing the hydrogen in a catalyst .
this action , called hydrogenation , breaks all the double bonds and makes a fully saturated fat .
to make vegetable shortening , then liquid " cis "-unsaturated fats such as vegetable oil are hydrogenated to produce saturated fats .
trans fats are made when hydrogen is made by the catalyst .
saturated fats can stack themselves in a closely packed arrangement .
for example , animal fats tallow and lard are high in saturated fatty acid content and are solids .
olive and linseed oils are liquid .
fats serve both as energy sources for the body , and as stores for energy in excess of what the body needs immediately .
each gram of fat when burned or metabolized releases about 9 food caloriesoriesoriescolor 37 kj = 8.8 kcal combinations .
fats are broken down in the healthy body to release their constituents , glycerol and fatty acids .
glycerol is a source of energy .
there are many different kinds of fats .
fat is a type of fat that is made up of fatty acids .
most fats are glycerides .
one chain of fatty acid is bonded to each of the three-oh groups of the glycerol by the reaction of the carboxyl end of the fatty acid ulysses-coohohohohohohohohohohohoh ! with the alcohol ; i . e . three chains per molecule .
the carbons are linked by an-o-bond through dehydration synthesis .
this process is called esterification and fats are esters .
as a simple visual illustration , if the kinks and angles of these chains were straightened out , the molecule would have the shape of a capital letter e .
the fatty acids would each be a horizontal line .
fats therefore have bonds .
the properties of any specific fat molecule depend on the particular fatty acids constitute it .
fatty acids are made of carbon atoms linked into a chain of hydrogen atoms .
the longer its chain is .
long chains are more susceptible to intermolecular forces of attractionlity in this case , and so the longer ones melt at a higher temperature temperature temperatureened melting pointuration .
fatty acid chains may also differ by length , often categorized as short to very long .
any of these aliphatic fatty acid chains may be glycerated .
long chain fats are exemplified by tallowddled lard kapoor .
most fats found in food , whether vegetable or animal , are made up of medium to long-chain fatty acids , usually of equal or nearly equal length .
many cell types use either glucose or fatty acids for this energy .
heart and skeletal muscle are the most important animals in the body .
even though it is so far , fatty acids can also be used as a source of fuel for brain cells .
fat is also sources of essential fatty acids , an important dietary requirement .
they provide energy as noted above .
vitamins a , d , e , and k are fat-soluble .
fats play a vital role in maintaining healthy skin and hair , insulating body organs against shock , maintaining body temperature , and promoting healthy cell function .
fat also helps buffer against diseases .
when a substance reaches unsafe levels in the bloodstream , the body can effectively dilute .
this helps to protect vital organs until such time as the offending substances can be removed from the body by such means as excretion , urination , accidental or intentional bloodletting , sebum excretion , and hair growth .
adipose tissue is the body 's means of storing metabolic energy over long periods of time .
adipocytes testosterone store fat from the diet and from liver metabolism .
under energy stress these cells may degrade their stored fat to supply fatty acids and also glycerol to the circulation .
these metabolic activities are regulated by several hormones .
the hormone leptin is also released .
the location of the tissue determines its metabolic profile : visceral fat is in the abdominal walliness .
visceral fat was recently discovered to be a significant producer of signalling chemicals – i . e . , hormones coulter , among which several are involved in inflammatory tissue responses .
resistin is linked to obesity , insulin resistance , and type 2 diabetes .
this result is currently controversial .
dietary consumption of fatty acids has effects on human health .
studies have found that replacing saturated fats with " cis " unsaturated fats in the diet reduces risk of cardiovascular disease .
for example , a 2015 systematic review of randomized control trials by the cochrane library concluded : " lifestyle advice to all those at risk of cardiovascular disease and to lower risk population groups should continue to include permanent reduction of dietary saturated fats and partial replacement by unsaturated fats . "
studies have also found that using " trans " fats increases risk of cardiovascular disease .
the harvard school of public health teaches that " trans " fats and saturated fats with cis -lrb- monounsaturated fats -rrb- should be good for health .
a 2014 study of randomized controlled trials found that reducing fat and cholesterol intake does not affect cardiovascular disease or all cause deaths .
