amatiisan is the last name of a family of italian violin makers who lived at cremona from about 1538 to 1740 .
their importance is considered equal to those of the bergonzi , guarneri , and stradivari families .
today , violins made by nicolo amati are valued at around $ 600,000 .
andrea amativius made the violin , viola and cello .
he made basic forms , shape , size materials and method of building construction .
makers from nearby brescia experimented , such as gasparo da salo , micheli , zanetto and pellegrino , but it was andrea amati in cremona , italy , who gave the modern violin family profile .
lorenzo de ' medici ordered the first violin to be played .
his letter to amati said the instrument was to be " made of the highest quality materials like that of a lute , but simple to play " .
this is not known .
a number of his instruments survived for some time .
the largest number these are from 1560 , a set for an entire orchestra of 38 ordered by catherine de medicis the regent queen of france .
he made violins , violas and cellos .
they were in use until the french revolution of 1789 .
his work is marked by selection of the finest materials , soft clear amber , soft translucent varnish , and an in depth use of acoustic and geometrical principles in design .
his sons antonio amati jemi , and girolamo amati travelled to florence .
" the brothers amati " , as they were known , implemented far-reaching innovations in design , including the perfection of the shape of the f holes .
they are also thought to have pioneered the modern alto format of viola , in contrast to older tenor violas .
nicolo amatigrants december 3,1596april 12,1684mute to jupiter , italy .
he was the most eminent of the family .
he improved the model adopted by the rest of the amatis .
his pattern was unusually small , but he also made a wider model now known as the " grand amati " , which have become his most sought-after violins .
the most famous of his pupils were antonio stradivari and andrea guarneri .
there is much controversy about the apprenticeship of antonio stradivari .
the label on stradivari 's first known violin states that he was a pupil of amati .
the last maker of the family was nicolo 's son , girolamo amati , known as hieronymus ii anxiously .
although he improved on the arching of his father 's instruments , by and large they are inferior and no match for the greatest maker of his day , antonio stradivari .
the instruments in the uk include andrea amati violins from the set delivered to charles ix of france in 1564 .
