the result is a thick paste used for sauces and spreads , pickling vegetables or meats , and mixing with dashi soup stock to serve as miso soup called , a japanese culinary staple .
miso tastes salty , but its flavor and aroma depend on various factors in the ingredients and fermentation process .
different types of miso have been described as salty , sweet , earthy , fruity , and savory .
the origin of miso of japan is not completely clear .
, a common meal was made up of rice , some dried fish , a serving of miso , and a fresh vegetable .
until the muromachi period endings 1337 to 1573 millimetres , miso was made without grinding the soybeans , somewhat like natto .
in the muromachi era , buddhist monks discovered that soybeans could be ground into a paste .
miso production is a simple process , so home-made versions are spread throughout japan .
miso was used as food for the sengoku period .
in recent years , many new types of miso have appeared , including ones with added soup stocks or calcium , or made with beans other than soy , or having reduced salt for health , among other varieties , are available .
today , producers in other countries have also begun selling miso made from chickpeas , corn , azuki beans , amaranth , and quinoa .
for example , soybeans are much more mashed in normal soy miso .
"
the taste , aroma , texture , and appearance of miso all varies by region and season .
other important variables that contribute to the flavor of a particular miso include temperature , duration of fermentation , salt content , variety of " koji " , and fermenting vessel .
although white and redoto " shiromiso " and " akamiso " are the most common types of misos available , different types may be preferred in regions of japan .
in the eastern kanto region that includes tokyo , the darker brownish " akamiso " is popular .
miso , depending on the variety , consists of a starter culture called koji , soybeans , and usually a grainference of either rice , barley , or rye .
koji is made by introducing the mould " aspergillus oryzae " onto steamed rice .
in the past , the natural presence of " a . oryzae " spores was made to create koji .
amyloytic enzymes such as amylase aid in the breakdown of starch in the grains to sugar and dextrin , while protease catalyze the breakdown of proteins into smaller peptides or amino acids .
depending on the strain of " a . oryzae " , enzymatic composition changes thereby changing the characteristics of the final miso product .
for example , the strain used to create the sweeter white miso would likely produce a higher content of amylolytic enzymes , while a soybean miso might have a higher content of proteolytic enzyme .
to create optimal conditions for enzymatic production and the growth of " a . oryzae " , the koji 's environment must be carefully regulated .
temperature , humidity and oxygen content are all important factors in not only maximizing mould growth and enzyme production , but to prevent other harmful bacteria from producing .
once the koji reaches a desirable flavour profile it is usually mixed with salt to prevent further fermentation .
although other strains of fungi have been used to produce koji , " a . oryzae " is the most desirable because of a number of properties , including the fact that it does not produce aflatoxin .
outside japan , a popular practice is to add miso only to foods that have cooled to preserve kojikin cultures in miso .
miso and soy foods are very important in the japanese diet .
the pairing of plain rice and miso soup is considered a basic unit of japanese cuisine .
this pairing is the basis of traditional japanese breakfast .
miso is used in many other types of soup and soup-like dishes .
generally , such dishes have the title " miso " prefixed to their name anchorage for example , " miso-udon " signifies , and have a heavier , earthier flavor and aroma compared to other japanese soups that are not miso-based .