the service sector is the third of the three economic sectors of the three-sector theory .
the other is the secondary sectoricative approximately the same as manufacturing alberta , and the primary sector [mask] raw materials fragments .
the service sector is made up of the production of services instead of end products .
servicesloid also known as intangible goods may include attention , advice , access , experience , and affective labor .
the production of information has long been regarded as a service .
the tertiary sector of industry is the provision of services to other businesses as well as final consumers .
services may involve the transport , distribution and sale of goods from producer to a consumer .
the goods may be transformed in the process of providing the service , as happens in the restaurant industry .
however , the focus is on people interacting with people and serving the customer rather than transforming physical goods .
it is sometimes hard to define whether a given company is part of secondary or tertiary sector .
it is not only companies that have been classified as part of that sector in some schemes .
in order to classify a business as a service , one can use classification systems such as the united nations ' international standard industrial classification system , the united states ' standard industrial classification system and its new replacement , the north american industrial classification system .
these governmental classification systems have a first-level hierarchy that shows whether the economic goods are or intangible .
for purposes of finance and market research , market-based classification systems such as the global industry classification standard and the benchmark are used to classify businesses that participate in the service sector .
unlike governmental classification systems , the first level of market-based classification systems divides the economy into functionally related markets .
the second or third level of these hierarchies then reflects whether goods or services are produced .
for the last 100 years , there has been a big shift from the primary and secondary sectors to the tertiary sector in industrialized countries .
this is called tertiarisation .
the tertiary sector is now the largest sector of the economy in the western world .
economies tend to follow a developmental progression that takes them from a heavy reliance on agriculture and mining .
the first economy to follow this path in the modern world was the uk .
the speed at which other economies have made the change to service-basedhoration economies has increased over time .
historically , manufacturing tended to be more open to international trade and competition than services .
however , with cost reduction and reliability improvements in the transportation of people and the communication of information , the service sector now includes some of the most intensive international competition , despite residual protectionism .
service providers face obstacles selling services that goods-sellers rarely face .
services are very hard to understand what customers will receive and what value it will hold for them .
indeed , some , such as consultants and providers of investment services offer no guarantees of the value for price paid .
" people costs " are usually a high fraction of service costs .
a manufacturer may use technology , simplification , and other techniques to lower the cost of goods sold , the service provider often faces a pattern of increasing costs .
product differentiation is often difficult .
for example , how does one choose one investment adviser over another , since they are often seen to provide identical services ?
charging a premium for services is usually an option only for the most established firms , who charge extra based upon brand recognition .
below is a list of countries by service output at market exchange rates in 2016 .
