the other is the secondary sectoricative approximately the same as manufacturing alberta , and the primary sector [mask] raw materials fragments .
the service sector is made up of the production of services instead of end products .
the production of information has long been regarded as a service .
the tertiary sector of industry is the provision of services to other businesses as well as final consumers .
services may involve the transport , distribution and sale of goods from producer to a consumer .
the goods may be transformed in the process of providing the service , as happens in the restaurant industry .
however , the focus is on people interacting with people and serving the customer rather than transforming physical goods .
it is sometimes hard to define whether a given company is part of secondary or tertiary sector .
it is not only companies that have been classified as part of that sector in some schemes .
for purposes of finance and market research , market-based classification systems such as the global industry classification standard and the benchmark are used to classify businesses that participate in the service sector .
for the last 100 years , there has been a big shift from the primary and secondary sectors to the tertiary sector in industrialized countries .
the tertiary sector is now the largest sector of the economy in the western world .
economies tend to follow a developmental progression that takes them from a heavy reliance on agriculture and mining .
however , with cost reduction and reliability improvements in the transportation of people and the communication of information , the service sector now includes some of the most intensive international competition , despite residual protectionism .
indeed , some , such as consultants and providers of investment services offer no guarantees of the value for price paid .
"
a manufacturer may use technology , simplification , and other techniques to lower the cost of goods sold , the service provider often faces a pattern of increasing costs .
charging a premium for services is usually an option only for the most established firms , who charge extra based upon brand recognition .