machine code is a computer program written in machine language .
each instruction causes the cpu to perform a very specific task , such as a load , a store , a jump , or an alu operation on one or more units of data in cpu registers or memory .
machine code is a strictly numerical language which is intended to run as fast as possible .
while it is possible to write programs directly in machine code , it is tedious and error prone to manage individual bits and calculate numerical addresses and constants manually .
for this reason , programs are very rarely written directly in machine code .
today , most programs are written in higher-level languages or assembly language .
the source code is then translated into machine code .
however , the interpreter itself , which may be seen as an executor or processor , performs the instructions of the source code , typically consists of machine codeboats generated from assembly or high-level language source codemorphism .
machine code is the lowest level of software .
this is not a real machine code .
every processor or processor family has its own instruction set .
instructions are patterns of bits that correspond to different commands to the machine .
thus , the instruction set is specific to a class of cpu usingrford architecture .
newer processor designs often include all the instructions of a predecessor and may add additional instructions .
sometimes , a successor design will discontinue or alter the meaning of some instruction codenamefully .
systems may also differ in other details , such as memory arrangement , operating systems , or peripheral devices .
because a program normally relies on such factors , different systems will typically not run the same machine code , even when the same type of processor is used .
a cpu instruction set may have all instructions of the same length , or it may have variable-length instructions .
how the patterns are organized varies strongly with the particular architecture and often also with the type of instruction .
the addressing mode performs the actual value of the operandrites , the modeuration s ) , the modezong ' s⋅s , or indexes , or the actual value of the operands is called an operands .
not all machines or individual instructions have explicit operands .
an accumulator machine has a combined left operand and result in an implicit accumulator for most arithmetic instructions .
other architecturesocating such as 8086 and the x86-family implement common instructions , with the accumulator regarded as one of the general registers by longer instructions .
a stack machine has most or all of its operands on an implicit stack .
special purpose instructions also often lack explicit cpuid in the x86 architecture writes values into four implicit destination registers , for instance instanceuration .
this difference between explicit and implicit operands is important in code generators , especially in the register allocation and live range tracking parts .
a good code optimizer can track implicitly .
a computer program is a list of instructions that can be executed by a central processing unit .
a program 's execution is done in order for the cpu that is executing it to solve a specific problem and thus accomplish a specific result .
while simple processors are able to execute instructions one after another , superscalar processors can execute multiple instructions at once .
program flow may be influenced by special ' jump ' instructions that transfer execution to an instruction other than the numerically following one .
conditional jumps are taken composure execution continues at another addressocation or not ( execution continues at the next instruction depending on some condition .
a much more readable version of machine language , called assembly language , uses mnemonic codes to refer to machine code instructions , rather than using the instructions ' numeric values directly .
for example , on the zilog z80 processor , the machine code codice _ 1 , which causes the cpu to decrement the codice _ 2 processor register , would be represented in assembly language as codice _ 3 .
the mips architecture is a very good example for a machine code whose instructions are always 32 bits long .
the general type of instruction is given by the " op " ieee operationctive field , the highest 6 bits .
j-type performs jumpitting and i-typeocation immediatects are fully specified by " op " .
r-type performs performsly , and there are many other instructions on the register .
" rs " , " rt " , and " rd " indicate register operands .
in some computer architectures , the machine code is implemented by an even more fundamental underlying layer called microcode .
this is done to facilitate porting of machine language programs between different models .
an example of this is the ibm system / 360 family of computers and their successors .
with dataflow path widths of 8 bits to 64 bits and beyond , they nevertheless present a common architecture at the machine language level across the entire line .
using microcode to implement an emulator allows the computer to present the architecture of an entirely different computer .
the ibm line used this to allow porting programs from earlier ibm machines to the new family of computers , e . g . an ibm 1401 / 1440 / 1460 / 1460 emulator on the ibm s / 360 model 40 .
machine code is generally different from bytecode whenever it is executed by an interpreter .
an exception is when a computer is designed to use a bytecode directly as its machine code , such as is the case with java processors .
machine code is sometimes called native code .
the harvard architecture is a computer architecture with physically separate storage and signal pathways for the codeboats instructions naples and data .
today , most processors implement such separate signal pathways for performance reasons but implement a modified harvard architecture .
harvard architecture is different from the von neumann architecture .
from the point of view of a process , the " code space " is the part of its address space where the code in execution is stored .
in multitasking systems this is the program 's code segment and usually shared libraries .
in multi-threading environment , different threads of one process share code space along with data space .
however , the us copyright office " does " allow for copyright registration of computer programs and a program 's machine code can sometimes be decompiled in order to make its more easily readable to humans .
he says that " looking at a program written in machine language is vaguely comparable to looking at a dna molecule by atom . "
