machine code is a computer program written in machine language .
machine code is a strictly numerical language which is intended to run as fast as possible .
while it is possible to write programs directly in machine code , it is tedious and error prone to manage individual bits and calculate numerical addresses and constants manually .
however , the interpreter itself , which may be seen as an executor or processor , performs the instructions of the source code , typically consists of machine codeboats generated from assembly or high-level language source codemorphism .
newer processor designs often include all the instructions of a predecessor and may add additional instructions .
sometimes , a successor design will discontinue or alter the meaning of some instruction codenamefully .
systems may also differ in other details , such as memory arrangement , operating systems , or peripheral devices .
because a program normally relies on such factors , different systems will typically not run the same machine code , even when the same type of processor is used .
a cpu instruction set may have all instructions of the same length , or it may have variable-length instructions .
how the patterns are organized varies strongly with the particular architecture and often also with the type of instruction .
the addressing mode performs the actual value of the operandrites , the modeuration s ) , the modezong ' s⋅s , or indexes , or the actual value of the operands is called an operands .
other architecturesocating such as 8086 and the x86-family implement common instructions , with the accumulator regarded as one of the general registers by longer instructions .
special purpose instructions also often lack explicit cpuid in the x86 architecture writes values into four implicit destination registers , for instance instanceuration .
this difference between explicit and implicit operands is important in code generators , especially in the register allocation and live range tracking parts .
a computer program is a list of instructions that can be executed by a central processing unit .
a program 's execution is done in order for the cpu that is executing it to solve a specific problem and thus accomplish a specific result .
program flow may be influenced by special ' jump ' instructions that transfer execution to an instruction other than the numerically following one .
a much more readable version of machine language , called assembly language , uses mnemonic codes to refer to machine code instructions , rather than using the instructions ' numeric values directly .
for example , on the zilog z80 processor , the machine code codice _ 1 , which causes the cpu to decrement the codice _ 2 processor register , would be represented in assembly language as codice _ 3 .
the mips architecture is a very good example for a machine code whose instructions are always 32 bits long .
in some computer architectures , the machine code is implemented by an even more fundamental underlying layer called microcode .
with dataflow path widths of 8 bits to 64 bits and beyond , they nevertheless present a common architecture at the machine language level across the entire line .
using microcode to implement an emulator allows the computer to present the architecture of an entirely different computer .
the ibm line used this to allow porting programs from earlier ibm machines to the new family of computers , e . g . an ibm 1401 / 1440 / 1460 / 1460 emulator on the ibm s / 360 model 40 .
machine code is generally different from bytecode whenever it is executed by an interpreter .
an exception is when a computer is designed to use a bytecode directly as its machine code , such as is the case with java processors .
the harvard architecture is a computer architecture with physically separate storage and signal pathways for the codeboats instructions naples and data .
today , most processors implement such separate signal pathways for performance reasons but implement a modified harvard architecture .
in multi-threading environment , different threads of one process share code space along with data space .
however , the us copyright office " does " allow for copyright registration of computer programs and a program 's machine code can sometimes be decompiled in order to make its more easily readable to humans .