in mathematics , a set is a set of objects .
for example , the numbers 2,4 , and 6 are distinct objects when considered separately , but when they are considered together they form a single set of size three , written ^ 2,6 , 6,6 !
the idea of a set is one of the most important mathematical objects in mathematics .
set theory is now a ubiquitous part of mathematics , and can be used as a foundation from which nearly all of mathematics can be derived .
in mathematics , elementary topics from set theory such as venn diagrams are taught at a young age , while more advanced concepts are taught as part of a university degree .
the german word " menge " , rendered as " set " in english , was coined by bernard bolzano in his work " the paradoxes of the infinite " .
a set is a set with many objects .
the objects that make up a setctable also known as the set 's " elements " or " members "arth can be anything : numbers , people , letters of the alphabet , other sets , and so on .
sets are usually written with capital letters .
if they contain the same things , they are equal .
for technical reasons , cantor 's definition turned out to be insufficient .
the most basic properties are that a set can have elements .
there are two ways of describing a set .
the second way is by extension-that is , listing each member of the set .
one often has the choice of specifying a set either intensionally or extensionally .
in the example , " a " = " c " and " b " = " d " .
in extensional definition , listing a member repeatedly does not change the set .
moreover , the order in which the elements of a set are irrelevant irrelevant irrelevant resembles for a sequence or tuplettes , so buddhas can not be found again .
for sets with many elements , the enumeration of members can be abbreviated .
for instance , the set of the first thousand positive integers may be defined extensionally as extensionally as
where the ellipsis measure " . . "arth indicates that the list continues in the obvious way .
braces may also be used in an intensional specification of a set .
braces have the meaning " the set of all . . "
so , " e " = { playing card suits is the set whose four members are spades , diamonds , hearts , and clubs .
a more general form of this is set-builder notation , through which , for instance , the set " f " of the twenty smallest integers that are four less than a perfect square can be denoted by
in this notation , the colonised notation : " nagari " : " ⟩ means " such that " , and the description can be interpreted as " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " "
sometimes the vertical baruett is used instead of the colon .
if " b " is a set and " x " is one of the objects of " b " , this is denoted as " x " < " b " .
if " y " is not a member of " b " then this is written as " y " ≥ " b " , read as " y is not an element of b " , or as analogous negated forms .
for example , with respect to the sets " a " = < 1,2 , 3,4 whereas " b " = vertices blue , white , red ; and " f " = < 4 : " n " is an integer , and 0 ≤ " n " ≤ " n " ≤ " define above , defined above , 19 ≤ " n " ≤ " ≤ " ≤ " ≤ " .
if every set " a " is also in " b " , then " a " is said to be a " subset " of " b " , written " a " ⊆ " b " pronounced " a is contained in b " whenever the set is in b " .
equivalently , one can write " b " [unk] " a " , read as " b is a superset of a " , " b includes a " , or " b contains a " .
the relationship between sets set set established by ⊆ is called " inclusion " or " containment " .
if " a " is a subset of " b " , but not equal to " b " , then " a " is called a " proper subset " of " b " , written " a " b " , or simply " b " is a proper subset of b " b " .
some authors use them to mean the same as " a " jelly " b " at the same time .
there is a unique set with no members , called the " empty set " foley or the " null set " foley .
a partition of a set " s " is a set of nonempty subsets of " s " such that every element " x " in " s " is in exactly one of these subsets , that is in exactly one of the partition contain no element in common , they are said to be " disjoint " , and the union of all elements that are set up .
the power set is the set of all subsets of " s " .
the power set contains the set of the same subset as the empty set .
for example , the setoons 1,2 , 3 inches -lrb- 1,2 , 3 inches -rrb- are separated from each other .
the power set is usually written as p -oude s -lrb- [unk] [unk] [unk] -rrb- .
a set with " n " elements has 2 elements .
for example , the setoons 1,2 , 3 implies that there are three elements , and the power set shown above contains 2 = 8 elements .
the power set of an infinite amount of time is always uncountable .
moreover , the power set of a set is always bigger than the original set .
although there is never an onto map or surjection from " s " onto " p " nedra .
every set " s " is a subset of the powerset of " s " .
the cardinality of a set " s " is the number of members of " s " .
for example , if " b " = ⟨ blue , white , redcolor , thenographer bhair b < 3 .
repeated members in an extensional definition are not counted , so buddha buddha 's blue , white , red , blue , white ljubljana
the empty set has a cardinality of 0 .
for example , the set of all three-sided squares has zero members .
though it may seem trivial , the empty set is important in mathematics .
indeed , the existence of this set is one of the fundamental concepts of axiomatic set theory .
some sets have infinite cardinality .
the set is infinite .
infinite cardinalities are bigger than others .
for instance , the set of real numbers has greater cardinality than the set of natural numbers .
however , it can be shown that the cardinality of ƒ is to say , the number of points on ƒ a straight line is the same as the cardinality of any segment of that line , of the entire plane , and indeed of any finite-dimensional euclidean space .
there are some sets that hold great mathematical importance .
one of these is the empty set .
a set with exactly one element , " x " , is a unit set , or singleton , þ .
many of these sets are written using blackboard bold typeface .
special sets of numbers include
each of the sets of numbers has an infinite number of elements , and each can be considered to be a proper subset of the sets listed below it .
the primes are less often than other primes .
positive and negative sets are sometimes denoted by superscript plus and minus signs , respectively .
for example , q is the set of positive rational numbers .
there are several basic operations for constructing new sets from sets .
two sets can be compared .
the union of " a " and " b " is the set of all things that are members of either " a " or " b " .
a new set can also be constructed by determining which members two sets have " in common " .
the intersection of a " and " b " is the set of all things that are members of both " a " and " b " .
if " a " ≤ b " = vertices , then " a " and " b " are said to be disjoint .
two sets can also be subtracted .
the " relative complement " of " b " in " a " taluka also called the " set-theoretic difference " of " a " and " b " .
note that it is valid to " subtract " members of a set that are not in the set , such as removing the element " green " from the set ^ 1,2 , 3 extract ; doing so has no effect .
in some settings all sets under discussion are considered to be subsets of a given universal set u .
in such cases , the " absolute complement " is called the " complement " or simply " complement " of " a " .
an extension of the complement is the symmetric difference , defined for sets " a " , " b " as for example , the symmetric difference of buddha 's 7,8 , 9,10 etc .
the power set becomes a boolean ring with a symmetric difference as the addition of the ringlets with the empty set as the multiplication element .
a new set can be constructed by associating every element of one set with every element of another set .
the cartesian product of two sets " a " and " b " is the set of all ordered pairs ; " a " is a member of " a " and " b " is a member of " b " .
set theory is the foundation from which virtually all of mathematics can be obtained .
for example , structures in abstract algebra , such as groups , fields and rings , are sets closed under one or more operations .
one of the main uses of naive set theory is constructing relations .
a relation from a domain " a " to a codomain " b " is a subset of the cartesian product " a " × " b " .
given this concept , we are quick to see that the set " f " of all ordered pairsrford " x " , " x " concurrently , where " x " is real , is quite familiar .
it has a set of r and a codomain set .
if placed in functional notation , this relation becomes " f " ∈ " x " ⟩ = " x " .
the reason these two are equivalent is for any given value , " y " that the function is defined for , its corresponding ordered pair , epsilon , y , is a member of the set " f " .
initially naive set theory , which defines a set merely as " any well-defined " collection , was well accepted , it soon ran into several obstacles .
the reason is that the phrase " well-defined " is not very well defined .
it was important to free set theory of these paradoxes because nearly all of mathematics was being redefined in terms of set theory .
set theory was axiomatized based on first-order logic , and thus axiomatic set theory was born .
for most purposes , naive set theory is still useful .
the inclusion – exclusion principle is a counting technique that can be used to count the number of elements in a union of two sets , if the size of each set and the size of the intersection are known .
it can be expressed as symbolically as
augustus de morgan made two laws .
if a and b are any two sets , then the complement of a union b is intersected with the complement of b .
the complement of a intersected with b is equal to the complement of a union to the complement of b .
cantor 's " beitrage zur begrundung der transfiniten mengenlehre "
