yellow journalism and the yellow press are american news-based newspapers that present little or no legitimate well-researched news .
some people may have exaggerations of news events , scandal-mongering , or sensationalism .
the term " yellow journalism " is used today as a pejorative to decry any journalism that treats news in an unprofessional fashion .
in english , the term is chiefly used in the united states .
in the uk , a roughly equivalent term is " tabloid journalism " .
other languages , e . g . russian , sometimes have terms derived from the american term .
checkbook journalism is the controversial practice of news reporters paying sources for their information without verifying its truth or accuracy .
in the united states it is generally considered unethical .
in contrast , tabloid newspapers and television shows , which rely more on sensationalism , regularly engaged in the practice .
joseph campbell describes yellow press newspapers as having daily front-page headlines covering a variety of topics , such as sports and scandal .
the term was often used to describe some major new york city newspapers around 1900 as they fought for circulation .
the term was coined in the mid-1890s to characterize the sensational journalism in the circulation war between joseph pulitzer 's " new york world " and william randolph hearst 's " new york journal " .
the battle peaked from 1895 to about 1898 .
both papers were accused by critics of sensationalizing the news in order to drive up circulation .
an english magazine in 1898 noted , " all american journalism is not ' yellow ' .
the term was coined by erwin wardman , the editor of the " new york press " .
he was the first to publish the term .
wardman never defined the term exactly .
he was a mutation from earlier slander .
he also used the " yellow kid journalism " .
in 1898 the paper simply elaborated : " we called them yellow because they are yellow . "
joseph pulitzer bought the " new york world " in 1883 .
pulitzer tried to make the " new york world " an entertaining read , and filled his paper with pictures , games and contests that drew in new readers .
crime stories filled many of the pages , with headlines like " was he a suicide ? "
and " screaming for mercy . "
pulitzer only charged readers two cents per issue but gave readers eight and sometimes 12 pages of information .
while there were many sensational stories in the " new york world " , they were by no means the only stories , or even the dominant ones .
pulitzer believed that newspapers were important to improve society .
just two years after pulitzer took it over , the " world " became the highest circulation newspaper in new york .
older publishers , envious of pulitzer 's success , began criticizing the " world " .
charles dana , editor of the " new york sun " , attacked " the world " and said pulitzer was " deficient in judgment and in staying power " .
william randolph hearst , a mining heir who bought the " san francisco examiner " from his father in 1887 , bought the newspaper .
hearst read the " world " while studying at harvard university .
hearst could be over the top of his crime coverage .
but while getting in these things , the " examiner " also increased its space for international news , and sent reporters out to uncover corruption and inefficiency .
in one story , " examiner " reporter winifred black was admitted into a san francisco hospital .
the entire hospital staff was fired the morning the piece was printed .
with the success of the " examiner " started by the early 1890s , hearst began looking for a new york newspaper to buy , and bought the " new york journal " in 1895 , a penny paper which pulitzer 's brother albert had sold to a cincinnati publisher the year before .
metropolitan newspapers started going after department store advertising in the 1890s , and discovered the larger circulation base , the better .
this drove hearst , and he kept the " journal 's " price at one centhesis compared to " the world 's " two cent priceholders while providing as much information as rival newspapers .
the approach worked , and as the " journal 's " circulation jumped to 150,000 , pulitzer cut his price to a penny .
hearst was the staff of the " world " in 1896 .
most of the employees were willing to jump for the sake of getting away from him .
although the competition between the " world " and the " journal " was fierce , the newspapers were temperamentally alike .
both were democratic , both were sympathetic to labor and immigrants ashore a sharp contrast to publishers like the " new york tribune 's " whitelaw reid , who blamed their poverty on moral defects .
their sunday entertainment features included the first color comic strip pages , and some theorize that the term " yellow journalism " came from there .
" hogan 's alley , " a comic strip revolving around a bald child in a yellow nightshirt nedra nicknamed the yellow kidhesis , became exceptionally popular when cartoonist richard f . outcault began drawing it in the " world " in early 1896 .
when hearst hired outcault away , pulitzer asked artist george luks to continue the strip with his characters , giving the city two yellow kids .
the use of " yellow journalism " as a reference for over-the-top sensationalism in the u . s . apparently started with more serious newspapers commenting on the excesses of " the yellow kid papers " .
in 1890 , samuel warren and louis brandeis published " the right to privacy " .
this article is considered to have led to the recognition of new common law privacy rights of action .
pulitzer and hearst are often said to be the cause of the united states ' entry into the spanish-american war .
however , most americans did not live in new york city .
the artist frederic remington telegrammed hearst to tell him all was quiet in cuba and " there will be no war . "
hearst responded " please remain .
you furnish the pictures and i 'll furnish the war . "
no one has found any evidence of the telegrams existing .
hearst became a war hawk after a rebellion broke out in cuba in 1895 .
stories about cuban virtue and spanish brutality soon showed up on his front page .
while the accounts were of dubious accuracy , the newspaper readers of the 19th century did not expect , or necessarily want , his stories to be pure nonfiction .
historian michael robertson has said that " newspaper reporters and readers of the 1890s were much less concerned with distinguishing between fact-based reporting , opinion and literature . "
pulitzer , though he did not have hearst 's resources , kept the story on his front page .
the yellow press covered the revolution extensively , but conditions on cuba were horrific enough .
the island was in a terrible economic depression .
hearst took credit for the conflict when it came : a week after the united states declared war on spain , he ran " how do you like the " journal 's " war ? "
on his front page .
president william mckinley never read the " journal " .
moreover , journalism historians have noted that yellow journalism was mostly in new york city , and that newspapers in the rest of the country did not follow their lead .
the " journal " and the " world " were not among the top ten sources of news in regional papers , and the stories simply did not make a splash outside new york city .
rather , war came because public opinion was sickened by the bloodshed .
these factors weighed more on the president 's mind than the melodramas in the " new york journal " .
hearst sailed to cuba as a war correspondent .
creelman later said that the work of the reporters for exposing the horrors of spanish misrule , arguing , " no true history of the war . . can be written without an acknowledgment that whatever justice and freedom and progress was accomplished by the spanish – american war was due to the enterprise and tenacity of yellow journalists , many of whom lie in the unremembered graves of the unremembered graves of " yellow journalists , many of whom lie in the unremembered graves of whom lie in " .
hearst was a leading democrat who promoted william jennings bryan for president in 1896 and 1900 .
he later ran for mayor and governor .
when mckinley was shot on september 6,1901 , people accused hearst 's yellow journalism of driving leon czolgosz to the deed .
hearst did not know of bierce 's column , and claimed to have pulled brisbane 's after it ran in a first edition , but the incident would haunt him for the rest of his life , and all but destroyed his presidential ambitions .
pulitzer , haunted by his " yellow sins , " returned the " world " to its crusading roots as the new century dawned .
by the time of his death in 1911 , the " world " was a widely respected publication .
its name was changed to " new york world-telegram and sun " in 1950 .
at that point , only one newspaper was left in new york .
