emperor sushun coins 天 皇 , sushun-tenno , died 592 childless .
sushun 's reign started in 587 and ended in 592 .
before he became the monarch , his personal namehesis was hatsusebe "-shinno " , also known as hatsusebe no waka-sazaki .
his name at birth was hatsusebearing [unk] 瀬 部 .
he was the twelfth son of emperor kimmei .
his mother was soga no oanecase [unk] [unk] [unk] 子 , a daughter of soga no iname .
he succeeded his half-brother emperor yomei in 587 .
sushun 's contemporary title would not have been " tenno " .
rather , it was presumably " sumeramikoto " or " amenoshita shiroshimesu okimi " 治 天 下 大 王 ¥ , meaning " the great king who rules all under heaven " .
he was also known as the " great king of yamato " .
he came to the throne with the support of the soga clan and empress suiko .
initially , the mononobe clan , a rival clan of the sogas , allied with prince anahobe , another son of kimmei , and attempted to have him installed as emperor .
at the battle of shigisan , soga no umako , who succeeded his father as oomi of the soga clan , eventually killed mononobe no moriya , the head of the mononobe clan .
umako then installed emperor sushun on the throne .
as time went on , sushun eventually became happy of umako 's power , and wanted him to be deposed .
one day , he saw a wild boar and said , " i want to kill soga umako like this wild boar . "
this angered soga no umako and , perhaps out of fear of being struck first , umako had sushun assassinated by yamato no aya no koma 東 漢 [unk] 皇 in 592 .
emperor sushun 's reign lasted for five years before his death at the age of 72 .
the actual place of sushun 's grave is known .
the emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial shinto shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine buddha -lrb- " misasagi " -rrb- at nara .
the imperial household agency designates this location as yomei 's mausoleum .
it is formally named " kurahashi no oka no misasagi " .
sushun had one empress and two imperial children .
