the montevideo convention on the rights and duties of states is a treaty signed at montevideo , uruguay , on december 26,1933 , during the seventh international conference of american states .
today , the declarative theory of statehood is part of customary international law .
at the conference , united states president franklin d . roosevelt and secretary of state cordell hull declared the " good neighbor policy " .
the convention was signed by 19 states .
the acceptance of three of the signatories was subject to minor reservations .
the states of brazil , peru and the united states were all states .
the convention was started on december 26,1934 .
it was made into a league of nations treaty series on 8 january 1936 .
one of the u . s . representatives was dr . sophonisba preston breckinridge , the first female representative at an international conference .
in most cases , the only avenue open to self-determination for colonial or national ethnic minority populations was to achieve international legal personality as a nation-state .
the majority of delegations at the international conference of american states represented independent states that had emerged from former colonies .
in most cases , their own existence and independence had been disputed , or opposed , by one or more of the european colonial empires .
they agreed among themselves to criteria that made it easier for other dependent states with limited sovereignty to gain international recognition .
the convention also includes the rights and duties of statehood .
article 3 states that " the political existence of the state is independent of recognition by the other states . "
this is known as the declarative theory of statehood .
it stands in conflict with the alternative constitutive theory of statehood : a state exists only insofar as it is recognized by other states .
it should not be confused with the estrada doctrine .
independence and sovereignty are not mentioned in article 1 .
the convention was a prohibition of using military force to gain control .
article 11 of the convention , article 11 of the convention , says that there are no exceptions .
article 11 also reflects the contemporary stimson doctrine , and is now a fundamental part of international law through article 2 of the charter of the united nations .
the sixteen states ratified this convention .
the four states signed the convention on december 26,1933 .
the only state to attend the seventh international conference of american states , where the convention was agreed upon , which did not sign it was bolivia .
costa rica , which did not attend the conference , later signed the convention .
the montevideo convention is a restatement of customary international law .
the european union , in the principal statement of its badinter committee , follows the montevideo convention in its definition of a state : by having a territory , a population , and a political authority .
the committee also found that the existence of states was a question of fact .
switzerland , although not a member of the european union , adheres to the same principle , stating that neither a political unit needs to be recognized to become a state , nor does a state have the obligation to recognize another one .
at the same time , neither recognition is enough to create a state , nor does its absence abolish it .
