mario kart is a series of go-kart-style racing video games made by nintendo for the nintendo ds game console .
the first game in the series , " super mario kart " , was released in 1992 on the super nintendo entertainment system .
the " mario kart " series includes a total of fourteen games .
the latest game in the main series , " mario kart 8 deluxe " , was released on nintendo switch in april 2017 .
the series has sold over 100 million copies worldwide .
it was first released in 1992 for the super nintendo entertainment system .
shigeru miyamoto , the japanese video game designer who made the first " super mario bros . " game .
darran jones of nowgamer suggests that the first success of " super mario kart " was the result of including characters previously seen in " mario bros . " games , while also being a new type of racing game .
in the " mario kart " series , players compete in go-kart races .
up to twelve characters can compete in each race .
one of the features of the series is the use of various power-up items obtained by driving into item boxes laid out on the course .
these power-ups include mushrooms to give players a speed boost , koopa shells to be thrown at opponents , banana peelsand fake item boxes that can be laid on the course as hazards .
the type of weapon received from an item box is influenced by the player 's position in the race .
players lagging far behind may get more powerful items while the leader may only receive small defensive items .
this gameplay mechanism allows other players or computers a realistic chance to catch up to the leading player .
they can also perform driving techniques during the race such as mini-turbos , slipstreaming , and rocket starts .
as the series has progressed , each new game has introduced new gameplay elements , such as new circuits , items , modes , and playable characters .
" mario kart " is a series of games that are played by nintendo .
the " mario kart " series features many bandai namco characters such as pac-man .
the dlc for " mario kart 8 " added link from " the legend of zelda " , and villager and isabelle from " animal crossing " .
" mario kart 8 " has 42 characters .
many course themes are repeated throughout the series .
there are a number of courses that have not appeared elsewhere , but still belong in the mushroom kingdom , such as rainbow road .
each game in the series gives the game a lot of money .
each game 's tracks are divided into four " cups " .
most courses can be done in three laps .
the first game to feature courses from previous games was " mario kart : super circuit " .
each entry in the series has featured 16 " nitro " independently brand new courses introduced for said game whereupon 16 " retro " tracks lille reappearing courses from previous " mario kart " games eki eki across four cups each with four races .
in " mario kart 8 " , 16 additional tracks are available across two downloadable packages , seven for each package downloaded , including seven retro courses , four original courses , and five courses based on other nintendo franchises , including " f-zero " , " the legend of zelda " , and " animal crossing " .
each game features a variety of different modes .
at one point , there was also a " mario kart " game for the virtual boy in 1995 .
it was going to be the first sequel to " super mario kart " .
the game was cancelled due to the virtual boy 's commercial failure , but was revealed in a 2000 issue of german gaming magazine " the big n . "
items from " super smash bros .
brawl " in particular featuring a stage based on the nintendo 3ds ' appearance in " mario kart 7 " , " super smash bros . for wii u " featuring a rainbow road stage based on its appearance in " mario kart 7 " , " super smash bros .
ultimate " featuring spirits is based on the series .
some courses from the series have also appeared in " f-zero x " , " fortune street " , the " mario & sonic " series , " " , and the " warioware " series .
items from the series can also be seen in games such as " nintendogs " and " animal crossing " .
the " mario kart " series has had a range of merchandise released .
among them are a slot car racer series based on " mario kart ds " , which comes with mario and donkey kong figures , while wario and luigi are available separately .
a line of radio controlled karts have also been sold , with are controlled by game boy advance-shaped controllers , and feature mario , donkey kong , and yoshi .
there are also , larger karts that depict the same trio .
there are also mario , luigi , toad , yoshi , wario , donkey kong , and bowser .
there are also sound drops that are made by " mario kart wii " .
a land-line telephone featuring mario holding a lightning bolt while seated in his kart , has also been sold .
k ' nex has released " mario kart wii " sets , with mario , luigi , yoshi , donkey kong , and bowser in karts and bikes , as well as tracks from the game .
" mario kart 7 " and " mario kart 8 " k ' nex sets have also been released .
nintendo 's own customer rewards program , the nintendo dsc , released merchandise from the series as well .
these included a " mario kart 8 " official soundtrack , a " mario kart wii "-themed stopwatch , and gold trophies modeled after those in " mario kart 7 " .
before club nintendo , a " mario kart 64 " soundtrack was offered by mail .
in 2014 , mcdonald 's released " mario kart 8 " toys with happy meals .
the karts were customizable with stickers .
in 2018 , the board game monopoly gamer has a " mario kart " theme with courses from " mario kart 8 " and " mario kart 8 " .
in 2019 , hot wheels and mario kart will release their own track sets .
the " mario kart " series has received many positive reviews .
" nintendo power " listed the series as being one of the greatest multiplayer experiences .
guinness world records list six records set by the " mario kart " series .
" guinness world records " ranked the first " super mario kart " number 1 on the list of top 50 games of all time based on impact and lasting legacy .
" super mario kart " has been added into the video game hall of fame in 2019 .
like the " mario " series , the " mario kart " series has sold 138 million copies .
" super mario kart " has sold over 8 million copies .
" mario kart 64 " is the second bestselling game for the nintendo 64namics .
it has sold over 6 million copies .
it is the second best-selling game on the gamecubeivision next to " super smash bros .
" mario kart wii " has sold over 37 million copies .
it is the second best-selling game in the series .
" mario kart 8 " , released for the wii u , has sold 1.2 million copies in north america and europe on its first few days since launch , which was the console 's fastest-selling game until the record was beaten by " super smash bros . for wii u " .
it is the wii 's best-selling game .
in contrast , the enhanced port for the nintendo switch system , " mario kart 8 " , has sold 459,000 units in the united states in one day of its launch , making it the fastest-selling game in the series to date .
it is the best-selling nintendo switch game of all time .
both versions sold a total of 25.14 million copies .
in the portable entries , the series also performed outstanding sales . " " ,
, has sold 5.9 million copies , making it the fourth best-selling game on the game boy advance .
the second portable game , " mario kart ds " , has sold 23.60 million copies .
it is the third best-selling handheld game in the " mario " series .
it is the best-selling 3ds game in the united states .
in september 2016 , nintendo filed an objection against the japanese company maricar .
maricar 's english website warned customers not to throw " banana peels " or " red turtle shells " .
the service is popular with tourists .
nintendo argued that the maricar name was " meant to be mistaken for or confused with " mario kart " .
in january 2017 , the japan patent office dismissed the objection ruling that maricar was not widely recognized as an abbreviation of " mario kart " .
in february 2017 , nintendo sued maricar over copyright infringement for renting unauthorized costumes of nintendo characters and using their pictures to promote its business .
in september 2018 , maricar was ordered to stop using the characters and pay nintendo ¥10 million in damages .
