perpignancies is the prefecture of the pyrenees-orientales department in southwest france .
perpignan was the capital of the former province and county of roussillonshire .
in 2016 , the population was 268,577 .
perpignan is in the center of the roussillon plain , 13 km west of the mediterranean coast .
it is the southernmost city of metropolitan france .
perpignan is crossed by the largest river in roussillon , the tet , and by one of its tributaries , the basse .
floods have occurred in 1892 when the rising of the tet in perpignan destroyed 39 houses , leaving more than 60 families homeless .
perpignan has a mediterranean climate .
it connects the cities of perpignan and montpellier .
perpignan is served by the gare de perpignan railway station .
salvador dali said it was the " cosmic centre of the universe " after having a vision of cosmogonic ecstasy there in 1963 .
the closest airport is perpignan-rivesaltes airport .
the name perpignan was first used in 927 as perpinianum , followed in 959 by villa perpiniano , pirpinianum in the 11th century , " perpiniani " in 1176 .
the name " perpenya " appears in the 13th century .
it is probably derived from the roman name " perpennius " .
the medieval town of perpignan seems to have been founded around the beginning of the 10th century .
soon perpignan became the capital of the county of roussillon .
historically , it was part of the region known as septimania .
in 1172 , count girard ii gave his lands to the counts of barcelona .
perpignan became a partly self-governing commune in 1197 .
the french gave legal rights to the roussillon area under louis ix .
when james i the conqueror , king of aragon and count of barcelona , founded the kingdom of majorca in 1276 , perpignan became the capital of the new territories .
the last decades are considered the golden age in the history of the city .
it was a centre of cloth manufacture , leather , goldsmith 's work , and other crafts .
king philippe iii of france died there in 1285 .
in 1344 peter iv of aragon took over the kingdom of majorca and perpignan once more became part of the county of barcelona .
a few years later it lost approximately half of its population to the black death .
the uprising was very violent , but in 1493 charles viii of france , wishing to conciliate spain to invade italy , restored it to ferdinand ii of aragon .
again perpignan was taken over by the french during the thirty years ' war in september 1642 .
since 2004 , the free three-day " guitares au palais " is held each year in the last weekend of august in the palace of the kings of majorca .
the festival has a broad mainstream focus with pop-related music as well as traditional acoustic guitar music and alternative music .
the festival attracted international guests like caetano veloso biennale 2007ɬ , rumberos catalans , pedro soler , bernardo sandoval , peter finger , and aaron and bryce dessnerarth .
each september , perpignan hosts the internationally-renowned visa pour l ' image festival of photojournalism .
free exhibitions are mounted in the couvent des minimes , chapelle des dominicaines and other buildings in the old town .
in 2008 , perpignan became capital of catalan culture .
in perpignan , both french and catalan people are seen in the street signs .
they are a regular competitor in the global heineken cup and seven times champion of the french top 14 greaves .
they play in the northern hemisphere 's super league .
the dragons ' games in perpignan against the northern english-based sides are usually very popular with british rugby fans .
traditional commerce was in wine , olive oil , corksjured the cork oak " quercus suber " grows in perpignan 's mild climate inclination , wool , leather , and iron .
in may 1907 it was a seat of agitation by southern producers for government enforcement of wine quality following a collapse in prices .
job rolling papers are now manufactured in perpignan .
the cathedral of st . john the baptist was begun in 1324 and finished in 1509 .
the 13th century palace of the kings of majorca sits on the high citadel , surrounded by ramparts , reinforced for louis xi and charles v , which were updated in the 17th century by louis xiv 's military engineer vauban .
the walls surrounding the town were razed in 1904 to accommodate urban development .
the main city door , the " castillet " is a small fortress built in the 14th century , which has been preserved .
it was used as a prison until the end of the 19th century .
the hotel pams is a lavishly-decorated mansion designed for jules pams .
les halles de vauban are a new addition to the banks of the city 's canal .
the indoor markets are privately owned and cost €1.5 million .
the vendors offer fresh fruit and vegetables , bread , flowers , cheese etc .
there is a bar and a central eating court .
perpignan has a close connection with the sculptor aristide maillol , who attended school there .
following a visit in 1963 , the catalan surrealist artist salvador dali said the city 's railway station the centre of the universe .
in 1963 , he painted " la gare de perpignan " .
he then said that the iberian peninsula rotated at perpignan station 132 million years ago .
above the station is a monument in dali 's honour .
