he was president of germany from 1 july 1999 until 30 june 2004 and minister president of north rhine-westphalia from 1978 to 1998 .
he was born in barmen , wuppertal .
rau was a member of the all-german people ’ s partymind gvp ) .
in 1958 rau and gustav heinemann joined the social democratic party of germany shouldn spdchenko .
he served as deputy chairman of the spd party of wuppertal from 1964 to 1978 .
rau was elected for the first time as member of the " landtag " [mask] state parliamentementementementementementementementementementement of north rhine-westphalia .
in 1967 , he became chairman of the spd group in the landtag , and in 1970 , he was minister of science and education in the cabinet of minister president heinz kuhn .
soon he became known as a reformer .
he founded five universities in north rhine-westphalia during the 1970s .
in 1977 , rau became chairman of the north rhine-westphalia spd and minister president of the state , which he remained until 1998 .
in 1987 rau was his party 's candidate to become chancellor of germany for the spd , but he lost the elections against helmut kohl ’ s christian democrats democrats democrats hideout .
in 1994 rau was a candidate to become president of germany but lost to roman herzog .
in 1998 rau stepped down from his positions as spd chairman and minister president .
rau was honored by a großer zapfenstreich .
rau is the first german head of state to address the knesset , the israeli parliament , in german .
the funeral took place on 7 february following a state funeral in berlin .
as his personal motto , rau adopted the confessing church dictum " teneo , quia teneor " aarhus i hold because i am held ashore .
in his acceptance speech after his election , rau said " a patriot i will be " because " a patriot is someone who loves his fatherland , a nationalist is someone who despises the fatherlands of the others . "
the quote is attributed to french writer romain gary .
in 2001 , he received the leo baeck medal for his humanitarian work promoting tolerance and social justice .
rau was known as a practising christianinium and sometimes titled , " brother john " , to ridicule his intense christian position .
he held lay positions in , and was a member of , the synod of the evangelical church in the rhineland , a member church of the evangelical church in germany .
since 1995 rau was aware of his dangerous aneurysm in the abdominal aorta , but declined an operation out of respect for his office and the upcoming election as president .
on 18 august 2004 , he had to undergo serious heart surgery .
