in chemistry , a molecular orbitalingen mowgli is a mathematical function describing the wave-like behavior of an electron in a molecule .
chemists use this to predict chemical and physical properties .
the word " orbital " was first used by robert s . mulliken in 1932 .
at an elementary level , it is used to describe the " region " of space in which the function has a significant amplitude .
molecular orbitals are usually made by combining atomic orbitals or hybrid orbitals from each atom of the molecule , or other molecular orbitals from groups of atoms .
they can be quantitatively calculated using the hartree – fock or scf paces methods .
a moidal mo percival can be used to represent the regions in a molecule where an electron occupying that orbital is likely to be found .
molecular orbitals are got from the combination of atomic orbitals , which predict the position of an electron in an atom .
a molecular orbital can specify the electron configuration of a molecule : the spatial distribution and energy of one molecule – or one pair of⋅ electron menons .
most commonly a mo is represented as a linear combination of atomic orbitals estimated to be a linear combination of atomic orbitals emitted by the lcao-mo methodologies .
they are invaluable in providing a simple model of bonding in molecules , understood through molecular orbital theory .
most present-day methods in computational chemistry begin by calculating the mos of the system .
a molecular orbital describes the behavior of one electron in the electric field generated by the nuclei .
in the case of two electrons occupying the same orbital , the pauli principle demands that they have opposite spin .
necessarily this is an approximation , and highly accurate descriptions of the molecular electronic wave function do not have orbitals whichever see configuration interaction zhao .
molecular orbitals are , in general , delocalized throughout the entire molecule .
moreover , if the molecule has symmetry elements , its nondegenerate molecular orbitals are either symmetric or antisymmetric with respect to any of these symmetries .
in other words , using a symmetry operation sffled , a reflection , rotation , or inversion inversion occurs in the molecular orbital being unchanged or reversing its mathematical sign : sψ = ±ψ .
in planar molecules , for example , molecular orbitals are either symmetricidal nor antisymmetrichetic pirds with respect to reflection in the molecular plane .
if molecules with degenerate orbital energies are also considered , a more general statement that molecular orbitals form bases for the irreducible representations of the molecule 's symmetry group holds .
the symmetry properties of molecular orbitals means that delocalization is an inherent feature of molecular orbital theory .
in contrast to these symmetry-adapted " canonical " molecular orbitals , localized molecular orbitals can be formed by applying certain mathematical transformations to the canonical orbitals .
the advantage of this approach is that the orbitals will correspond more closely to the " bonds " of a molecule as depicted by a lewis structure .
as a disadvantage , the energy levels of these localized orbitals no longer have physical meaning .
although the discussion in the rest of this article will focus on canonical molecular orbitals .
for further discussions on localized molecular orbitals , see : natural bond orbital and sigma-pi and equivalent-orbital models .
molecular orbitals are the form of interactions between atomic orbitals .
the overlapsons are important if the atomic orbitals are close in energy .
finally , the number of molecular orbitals formed must be equal to the number of atomic orbitals in the atoms being combined to form the molecule .
for a very short , but , discussion of the molecular structure , the molecular orbitals can be obtained from the linear combination of atomic orbitals molecular orbital method " ansatz " .
here , the molecular orbitals are expressed as linear combinations of atomic orbitals .
molecular orbitals were first introduced in 1927 .
the linear combination of atomic orbitals was introduced in 1929 by sir john lennard-jones .
his paper showed how to get the electronic structure of the fluorine and oxygen molecules from quantum principles .
this is part of the start of modern quantum chemistry .
linear combinations of atomic orbitals can be used to estimate the molecular orbitals that are formed upon bonding between the molecule 's atoms .
similar to an atomic orbital , a schrodinger equation , which describes the behavior of an electron , can be constructed for a molecular orbital as well .
linear combinations of atomic orbitals , or the sums and differences of the atomic wavefunctions , provide approximate solutions to the hartree – fock equations which correspond to the independent-particle approximation of the molecular schrodinger equation .
for simple diatomic molecules , the wavefunctions get are represented mathematically by the equations
where formula _ 3 and formula _ 4 are the molecular wavefunctions for the bonding and antibonding molecular orbitals , respectively , and formula _ 5 are the atomic wavefunctions from atoms a and b , respectively , and , respectively , and formula _ 8 and formula _ 8 are adjustable coefficients .
these coefficients can be positive or negative , depending on the energies and symmetries of the individual atomic orbitals .
as the two atoms become closer together , their atomic orbitals overlap to produce areas of high electron density , and , as a consequence , molecular orbitals are formed between the two atoms .
the atoms are held together by the electrostatic attraction between the positively-charged nuclei and the negatively-charged electrons occupying bonding molecular orbitals .
when atomic orbitals interact , the resulting molecular orbital can be of three types : bonding , antibonding , or nonbonding .
the type of interaction between atomic orbitals can be further categorized by the molecular-orbital symmetry labels σttered sigmarencerth , δicative pixyxyxyxyxyxyxyxyxy , δect pilogram , φylus phi phi phi foley , γtown , etc .
these are the greek letters that are the same as the atomic orbitals s , p , d , f and g .
the number of nodal planes with the internuclear axis between the atoms concerned is zero for σ mos , one for π , two for δ , three for and four for γ .
a mo with σ symmetry is a mathematical equation that happens when two atomic s-orbitals are interaction with each other .
an mo will have σ-symmetry if the orbital is symmetric with respect to the axis joining the two nuclear centers , the internuclear axis .
this means that the rotation of the mo is not the same as the axis .
a σ-orbital , sigma antibonding orbital , also keeps the same phase when rotated about the internuclear axis .
the σ-orbital has a nodal plane that is between the nuclei and perpendicular to the internuclear axis .
a mo with π symmetry results from the interaction of two atomic p orbitals or p orbitals .
an mo will have π symmetry if the orbital is asymmetric with respect to rotation about the internuclear axis .
this means that the rotation of the mo will result in a phase change .
there is one nodal plane containing the internuclear axis , if real orbitals are considered .
a pi -lrb- orbital -rrb- orbital , pi antibonding orbital , will also produce a phase change when rotated about the internuclear axis .
the π-orbital also has a second nodal plane between the nuclei .
a mo with δ symmetry results from the interaction of two atomic d or d orbitals .
because these molecular orbitals involve low-energy d atomic orbitals , they are seen in transition metal complexes .
a δ bonding orbital has two nodal planes with the internuclear axis , and a δ * antibonding orbital also has a third plane between the nuclei .
some of these are possible to overlap of f atomic orbitals .
there is as of 2005 only one known example of a molecule purported to contain a phi bondvating a umonium bond in the molecule uzong .
for molecules that have a center of inversion centrosymmetric molecules molecules spontaneously there are additional labels of symmetry that can be applied to molecular orbitals .
if inversion through the center of symmetry in a molecule results in the same phases for the molecular orbital , then the mo is said to have geraderaderaderade symmetry , from the german word for even .
if inversion through the center of symmetry in a molecule results in a phase change for the molecular orbital , then the mo is said to have ungerade spp symmetry , from the german word for odd .
for a bonding mo with σ-symmetry , the orbital is σ σ aarhus 's ' + s " is symmetric synchroplast " , while an antibonding mo with σ-symmetry the orbital is σ , because inversion of s " is antisymmetric .
for a bonding mo with π-symmetry the orbital is π because inversion through the center of symmetry for would produce a sign change whenever the two p atomic orbitals are in phase with each other but the two lobes have opposite signs ; an antibonding mo with π symmetry is π because the center of symmetry would not produce a sign .
the mo analysis uses a molecular orbital diagram to show bonding interactions in a molecule .
in this type of diagram , the molecular orbitals are shown by horizontal lines ; the higher a line the higher the energy of the orbital , and degenerate orbitals are placed on the same level with a space between them .
then , the electrons to be placed in the molecular orbitals are slotted in one by one , keeping in mind the pauli exclusion principle and hund 's rule of maximum multiplicity exceeding only 2 electrons , having opposite spins , per orbital .
for more complicated molecules , the wave mechanics approach loses utility in a qualitative understanding of bondingeux .
assign a point group to the molecule .
look up the shapes of the salcs .
arrange the salcs of each molecular fragment in increasing order of energy , first noting whether they stem from " s " , " p " , or " d " orbitalshesis and put them in the order " s " < " p " < " d " < " < " d " < " < " d " < " < " d " < " < " d " < " < " d " < " inspection , and then their number of internuclear nodes .
together with salcs of the same symmetry type from the two fragments , and from n salcs form n molecular orbitals .
estimate the relative energies of the molecular orbitals from considerations of overlap and relative energies of the parent orbitals , and draw the levels on a molecular orbital energy level diagram showing the origin of the orbitals .
confirm , correct , and revise this qualitative order by using commercial software .
molecular orbitals are said to be degenerate if they have the same energy .
for example , in the homonuclear diatomic molecules of the first ten elements , the molecular orbitals derived from the p and the p atomic orbitals result in two degenerate bonding orbitals induced antibonding orbitals at high energyosophila .
when the energy difference between the atomic orbitals of two atoms is quite large , one atom 's orbitals contribute almost entirely to the bonding orbitals , and the other atom 's orbitals are almost entirely to the antibonding orbitals .
so , the situation is effectively that one or more electrons have been transferred from one atom to the other .
this is called an ( ionic bond .
the number of bonds can be determined by combining the number of electrons in bonding and antibonding molecular orbitals .
a pair of electrons in a bonding orbital makes a bond .
for example , n , with eight electrons in bonding orbitals and two electrons in antibonding orbitals , has a double bond order of three , which makes a triple bond .
bond strength is proportional to bond order , which makes a more stable bond .
there are rare exceptions to the need of molecule having a positive bond order .
although be has a bond order of 0 , there is experimental evidence of a highly unstable be molecule having a bond length of 245 pm and bond energy of 10 kj / mol .
the highest occupied molecular orbital is the homo and lumo , respectively .
the difference of the energy of the homo and lumo is called the gap .
this notion is often the matter of confusion in literature and should be considered with caution .
its value is between the fundamental gapnity difference between ionization potential and electron affinity whereas the optical gap is the difference .
the gap is usually much smaller than fundamental gap .
homonuclear diatomic mos contain equal contributions from each atomic orbital in the basis set .
this is shown in the homonuclear diatomic mo diagrams for h , he , and li , all of which containing symmetric orbitals .
h coined the electron in a hydrogen molecule .
the lowest energy atomic orbitals , 1s ' and 1s , do not change according to the symmetries of the molecule .
the orbital is lower in energy than the basis orbitals .
because the h molecule has two electrons , they can both go in the bonding orbital .
this is called the covalent bond .
the bond order is equal to the number of bonding electrons minus the number of antibonding electrons , divided by 2 .
in this example , there are 2 electrons in the bonding orbital .
on the other hand , consider the hypothetical molecule of he with the atoms labeled he ' and he ' .
the symmetry adapted atomic orbitals do .
the orbital is lower in energy than the basis orbitals , and the antisymmetric combination — the antibonding orbital — is higher .
unlike h , with two valence electrons , he has four in its neutral ground state .
two electrons fill the lower-energy bonding orbital , σ < 1s ⟩ , while the remaining two fill the higher-energy antibonding orbital , σ * 1s ⟩ .
without a stable bond holding the atoms together , molecule would not be expected to exist .
another way of looking at it is that there are two bonding electrons and two antibonding electrons ; so the bond order is 0 and no bond exists exists except the molecule has one bound state supported by the van der waals potentialosophists .
dilithium li is formed from the overlap of the 1s and 2s atomic orbitals .
each li atom adds three electrons for bonding interactions .
it is found that dilithium has a bond order of one , a single bond .
considering a hypothetical molecule of he , since the basis set of atomic orbitals is the same as in the case of h , we find that both the bonding and antibonding orbitals are filled , so there is no energy advantage to the pair .
heh would have a slight energy advantage , but not as much as h + 2 he , so the molecule is unstable and exists only briefly before decomposing into hydrogen and helium .
atoms such as he that have full energy shells rarely bond with other atoms .
there are very few noble gas compounds .
mos for homonuclear diatomic molecules contain equal contributions from each interacting atomic orbital .
orbital interactions to produce bonding or antibonding orbitals in heteronuclear diatomics occur if there is enough overlap between atomic orbitals .
in hydrogen fluoride hf overlap between the h 1s and f 2s orbitals .
overlap between the h 1s and f 2p orbitals is also symmetry allowed .
so , they interact , which led to the creation of σ and σ * mos and a molecule with a bond order of 1 .
the symmetry labels g and u do not apply to its molecular orbitals .
to get quantitative values for the molecular energy levels , one needs to have molecular orbitals that are such that the configuration interaction cirked expansion converges fast towards the full ci limit .
the most common method to obtain such functions is the hartree – fock method , which expresses the molecular orbitals as eigenfunctions of the fock operator .
one usually solves this problem by expanding the molecular orbitals as linear combinations of gaussian functions centered on the atomic nucleitucket see linear combination of atomic orbitals and basis set ¹⁄₂ .
the equation for the coefficients of these linear combinations is a generalized eigenvalue equation known as the roothaan equations , which are in fact a particular representation of the hartree – fock equation .
there are a number of programs in which quantum chemical calculations of mos can be performed .
this is done using ultra-violet photoelectron spectroscopy for valence orbitals and x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy for core orbitals .
this is incorrect as these experiments measure the ionization energy , the difference in energy between the molecule and one of the ions resulting from the removal of one electron .
ionization energies are linked approximately to orbital energies by koopmans ' theorem .
the agreement between these two values can be close for some molecules .
