the main island of singapore is connected to the other islands by ferryboat services .
there are two bridges which link singapore to malaysia-the causeway , and the second link .
singapore has one of the most expensive public transport networks in the world , according to a study by london consulting firm credo .
the public transport system is controlled by the land transport authority .
fare regulation and bus service standards are under the purview of an independent body , the public transport council , while transitlink , established by sbs transit , smrt trains and smrt buses , helps to create a system with a common fare-payment mode , information platform , and a physical network without duplication of services .
the policies of the land transport authority are to encourage the use of public transport in singapore .
the main aims are to provide an incentive to live away from the central district , as well as to reduce air pollution .
all of these have air conditioning units installed due to singapore 's tropical climate .
the average amount of time people spend a year with public transit in singapore , for example to and from work on a weekday is 84 min .
the average amount of time people wait at a station for public transit is 12 min .
the average distance people usually ride in a single trip with public transit is 7.3 km , while 16 % travel for over 12 km in a single direction .
the singapore tourist pass offers unlimited travel for tourists to singapore on public transport system .
the singapore tourist pass is available at selected mrt stations .
singapore 's public transport system had been largely on buses , until the opening of the first section of the mass rapid transit in 1987 .
although buses still enjoy an average daily ridership exceeded the number carried on both the mrt and lrt systems に 3.9 million on buses .
the north south line , east west mrt line and circle line are operated by smrt trainspment smrt corporation enoch .
the circle line was opened on 14 january 2012 .
light rail transit functioning as feeders to the main mrt network has been under study for some time .
similar systems were introduced in sengkang and punggol in 2003 and 2005 respectively , both operated by sbs transit .
singapore has had other forms of light urban rail systems , such as the monorail system on sentosa island , which opened in february 1982 .
the changi skytrain opened in 1990 with terminal 2 and terminal 3 .
the jurong birdpark was closed in 2012 .
taxicabs are a form of public transport in singapore .
the trishaw has been discontinued for use as a means of transportation after 1980 .
there are six scheduled service airlines , all of them operating from singapore changi airport , offering scheduled flights to over 70 cities on six continents .
the singapore cable car , between mount faber on the main island of singapore and the resort island of sentosa , is a tourist attraction .
water transport within the main island is limited to the river taxi along the singapore river .
there are scheduled ferry services from the marina south pier to the southern islands such as kusu island and saint john 's island .
commercial ferry services are available for booking with scc 's subsidiary scc travel services .
the civil aviation authority of singapore is a statutory board of the singapore government under the ministry of transport .
the uk also allowed unrestricted services from singapore by uk carriers .
singapore carriers were allowed to operate domestic uk services as well as services beyond london heathrow to many destinations , including the united states .
singapore changi airport is one of the most important airlines in the region .
it is at the easternmost tip of the main island .
with the recent opening of the fourth terminal , changi is now capable of handling more than 70 million passengers every year .
there are boats and ferry services to nearby islands of malaysia and indonesia .
these services can be found at changi point ferry terminal , tanah merah ferry terminal , singapore cruise centre and marina bay cruise centre .
the port of singapore is the world 's busiest in terms of shipping tonnage handled 1.04 billion tons in 2004 .
singapore also became the top port in terms of cargo tonnage handled with 393 million tons of cargo in the same year , beating the port of rotterdam for the first time in the process .
singapore is ranked second globally in terms of containerised traffic , with 21.3 million twenty-foot equivalent units percival teus dq in 2004 , and is also the world 's busiest hub for transshipment traffic .
the port of singapore is also ranked the best seaport in asia .
since july 1,2011 , woodlands train checkpoint serves as the southern terminus of the ktm rail network .
two more rail links are being planned : the kuala lumpur-singapore high speed rail terminating in jurong east , and the johor bahru-singapore rapid transit system between woodlands north and bukit chagar , johor bahru .
the johor-singapore causeway is a causeway in the 1920s to connect johor bahru in johor , malaysia to woodlands in singapore .
the planning and maintenance of the road network is overseen by the land transport authority percival lta coulter .
these are important in singapore 's urban planning .
