The main island of Singapore is connected to the other islands by ferryboat services.
There are two bridges which link Singapore to Malaysia – the Causeway, and the Second Link.
Singapore has one of the most cost-efficient public transport networks in the world, according to a study by London consulting firm Credo.
The public transport system is regulated by the Land Transport Authority, which oversees the three main modes of public transportation.
Fare regulation and bus service standards are under the purview of an independent body, the Public Transport Council, while TransitLink, established by SBS Transit, SMRT Trains and SMRT Buses, helps to create a system with a common fare-payment mode, information platform, and a physical network without duplication of services.
The policies of the Land Transport Authority are meant to encourage the use of public transport in Singapore.
The key aims are to provide an incentive to reside away from the Central district, as well as to reduce air pollution.
There is also a system of bus routes throughout the island, all of which have air conditioning units installed due to Singapore's tropical climate.
The average amount of time people spend commuting with public transit in Singapore, for example to and from work, on a weekday is 84 min.
The average amount of time people wait at a stop or station for public transit is 12 min, while 11% of riders wait for over 20 minutes on average every day.
The average distance people usually ride in a single trip with public transit is 7.3 km, while 16% travel for over 12 km in a single direction.
Launched in December 2007 by Land Transport Authority, Singapore Tourism Board and EZ-Link, the Singapore Tourist Pass offers unlimited travel for tourists to Singapore on Singapore's public transport system.
The Singapore Tourist Pass is available at selected MRT stations.
Singapore's public transport system had been reliant largely on buses, until the opening of the first section of the Mass Rapid Transit in 1987.
Although buses still enjoy an average daily ridership exceeding the number carried on both the MRT and LRT systems (3.9 million on buses, compared to 3.1 million on the MRT and LRT in the year 2016), the Land Transport Authority plans to expand the rail system such that buses will eventually play only a feeder role to an extensive rail network.
The North South Line, East West Line and Circle Line are operated by SMRT Trains (SMRT Corporation), while the North East Line and Downtown Line since 22 December 2013, are run by SBS Transit.
The Circle Line Extension from Promenade to Marina Bay began operation since 14 January 2012.
Light rail transit functioning as feeders to the main MRT network has been under study for some time, particularly since the existing urban configuration of self-containing new towns spread out in the suburbs meant it was feasible to consider having light rail systems connecting each town to the MRT station in the town centre, a role which has traditionally been provided by feeder buses.
Although subsequently hit by over 50 incidents, some of which resulted in several days of system suspension, similar systems albeit from a different company were introduced in Sengkang and Punggol in 2003 and 2005 respectively, both operated by SBS Transit.
Singapore has had other forms of light urban rail systems, such as the monorail system on Sentosa island, which opened in February 1982.
The Changi Skytrain, a people mover system shuttling passengers between the three terminals at the Singapore Changi Airport, was opened originally in 1990 along with Terminal 2 and upgraded in 2006 with the completion of Terminal 3.
The Jurong BirdPark previously featured an air-conditioned panorail which closed in 2012.
Taxicabs are a popular form of public transport in the compact sovereign city-state of Singapore, with fares considered low compared to those in most cities in developed countries.
The Trishaw has been discontinued for usage as a means of transportation after 1980.
There are six local scheduled service airlines, all of them operating from Singapore Changi Airport, offering scheduled flights to over 70 cities on six continents.
The Singapore Cable Car, plies between Mount Faber on the main island of Singapore and the resort island of Sentosa.
Water transport within the main island is limited to the River Taxi along the Singapore River.
There are also daily scheduled ferry services from the Marina South Pier to the Southern Islands such as Kusu Island and Saint John's Island.
Commercial ferry services are available for booking with SCC's subsidiary SCC Travel Services which operates wowgetaways.com portal
The aviation industry is regulated by the Civil Aviation Authority of Singapore, a statutory board of the Singapore government under the Ministry of Transport.
An open skies agreement was concluded with the United Kingdom in October 2007 permitting unrestricted services from Singapore by UK carriers.
Singapore carriers were allowed to operate domestic UK services as well as services beyond London Heathrow to a number of destinations, including the United States along with Canada.
Singapore Changi Airport, with its four terminals, is one of the most important air hubs in the region.
The international airport is situated at the easternmost tip of the main island, and serves 185 cities in 58 countries.
With the recent opening of the fourth terminal, Changi is now capable of handling more than 70 million passengers every year.
There are boats and ferry services to nearby islands of Malaysia and Indonesia.
These services can be found at Changi Ferry Terminal, Changi Point Ferry Terminal, Tanah Merah Ferry Terminal, Singapore Cruise Centre and Marina Bay Cruise Centre Singapore.
The Port of Singapore, run by the port operators PSA International (formerly the Port of Singapore Authority) and Jurong Port, is the world's busiest in terms of shipping tonnage handled 1.04 billion gross tons were handled in 2004, crossing the one billion mark for the first time in Singapore's maritime history.
Singapore also emerged as the top port in terms of cargo tonnage handled with 393 million tonnes of cargo in the same year, beating the Port of Rotterdam for the first time in the process.
Singapore is ranked second globally in terms of containerised traffic, with 21.3 million Twenty-Foot Equivalent Units (TEUs) handled in 2004, and is also the world's busiest hub for transshipment traffic.
The Port of Singapore is also ranked the Best Seaport in Asia.
Since 1 July 2011, Woodlands Train Checkpoint serves as the southern terminus of the KTM rail network.
Two more rail links are being planned: the Kuala Lumpur-Singapore High Speed Rail terminating in Jurong East, and the Johor Bahru-Singapore Rapid Transit System between Woodlands North and Bukit Chagar, Johor Bahru.
The Johor-Singapore Causeway, built in the 1920s to connect Johor Bahru in Johor, Malaysia to Woodlands in Singapore, carries a road and a railway line.
The planning, construction and maintenance of the road network is overseen by the Land Transport Authority (LTA), and this extends to expressways in Singapore.
These form key transport arteries between the distinct towns and regional centres as laid out in Singapore's urban planning, with the main purpose of allowing vehicles to travel from satellite towns to the city centre and vice versa in the shortest possible distance.