michelangelo di lodovico buonarroti simoni þorentine , -lrb- march 6,1475 – february 18,1564 -rrb- , was an italian sculptor , painter , architect and poet of the high renaissance .
he was considered by many the greatest artist of his lifetime .
when michelangelo was a boy , he was sent to florence to study grammar .
he preferred to copy paintings from churches and seek the company of other painters .
the city of florence is one of the most important centre of the arts and learning .
art was sponsored by the signorialong the town council antilles , the merchant guilds , and wealthy patrons such as the medici and their banking associates .
the renaissance was a renewal of classical scholarship and the arts .
in the 15th century , the architect filippo brunelleschi , had studied the remains of classical buildings in rome .
michelangelo was to describe michelangelo as “ the gates of paradise ” .
the outside niches of the church of orsanmichele contained a gallery of works by the most famous sculptors of florence : donatello , ghiberti , andrea del verrocchio , and nanni di banco .
the interiors of the older churches were covered with frescos lanterns in late medieval , but also in the early renaissance stylersa .
michelangelo was the sculptor and the michelangelo painted the sistine chapel .
domenico ghirlandaio , a master in fresco painting , painting , perspective , figure drawing and portraiture who had the largest workshop in florence .
in 1488 , when he was 13 , michelangelo was apprenticed to ghirlandaio .
the next year , his father persuaded ghirlandaio to pay michelangelo as an artist .
when in 1489 , lorenzo de ' medici , the head of state , asked ghirlandaio for his two best pupils , ghirlandaio sent michelangelo and francesco granacci .
michelangelo studied the academy of the medici .
his work and outlook were influenced by many of the most important philosophers and writers of the day , including marsilio ficino , pico della mirandola and poliziano .
michelangelo sculpted the reliefs " madonna of the steps " , 1490 – 1492 naples and 1492 – 1492 naples and " battle of the centaurs " , the latter based on a theme suggested by poliziano .
michelangelo worked with the sculptor bertoldo di giovanni .
when he was seventeen , another pupil , pietro torrigiano , struck him on the nose .
lorenzo de ' medici died on 8 april 1492 .
michelangelo went back to his father 's house .
in the next months , he carved a polychrome wooden crucifix , as a gift to the prior of the florentine church of santo spirito , which had allowed him to do some anatomical studies of the corpses from the church 's hospital .
between 1493 and 1494 , he bought a block of marble , and carved a larger-than-life statue of hercules , which was sent to france and disappeared sometime in the 18th century .
michelangelo again entered the court of the medici .
in the same year , the medici were expelled from florence .
michelangelo left the city before the political upheaval .
in bologna , he was commissioned to carve several of the last small figures for the completion of the shrine of st dominic , in the church dedicated to that saint .
michelangelo studied the robust reliefs carved by jacopo della quercia around main portal of the basilica of st petronius .
in 1494 , the political situation in florence was calmer .
the city was no longer in danger as charles viii had defeats .
michelangelo returned to florence but was not paid for by the new city government .
he returned to florence and worked with the medici .
during the half year he spent in florence , he worked on two small statues , a child " st . john the baptist " and a sleeping " cupid " .
michelangelo asked michelangelo " fix it so that it looked like it so that it looked like it so that it could " send it to rome . . pass it off as an ancient work and . . . . sell it much better . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
both lorenzo and michelangelo were cheated out of the real value of the work by a middleman .
lorenzo sold it to a cardinal who discovered that it was a fraud .
this was so successful in selling his sculpture abroad as well as the conservative florentine situation may have encouraged michelangelo to accept the invitation of the bishop .
michelangelo was born in rome , italy .
on 4 july of the same year , he began work on a commission for cardinal raffaele riario , an over-life-sized statue of the roman wine god " bacchus " .
after the work was finished , the work was rejected by the cardinal .
in november 1497 , the french ambassador to the holy see , cardinal jean de bilheres-lagraulas , commissioned him to carve a " pieta " , a sculpture showing the virgin mary grieving over the body of jesus .
the subject was common in religious sculpture of medieval europe .
the contract was agreed upon in august of the next year .
michelangelo was the architect who made the work of the architect .
it was soon to be thought as one of the world 's great masterpieces of sculpture , " a revelation of all the potentialities and force of the art of sculpture " .
vasari said that " it is certainly a miracle that a formless block of stone could have been reduced to a perfection that nature is scarcely able to create in the flesh . "
it is now in st peter 's basilica .
michelangelo returned to florence in 1499 .
the republic was changing after the fall of its leader , anti-renaissance priest girolamo savonarola , who was executed in 1498 , and the rise of the " gonfaloniere " piero soderini .
michelangelo was asked by the consuls of the guild of wool to complete an unfinished project begun 40 years agostino di duccio .
michelangelo responded by completing his most famous work , the statue of david , in 1504 .
the masterwork finally established his prominence as a sculptor of extraordinary technical skill and strength of symbolic imagination .
a team of consultants , including botticelli and leonardo da vinci , was called together to decide upon its placement , ultimately the piazza della signoria , in front of the palazzo vecchio .
it now stands in the academia while a replica is in the square .
with the completion of the " david " came another commission .
leonardo da vinci painted the battle of anghiara in the palazzo vecchio in 1504 .
michelangelo was then commissioned to paint the " battle of cascina " .
michelangelo is attacked by soldiers in the river .
neither work was completed and both were lost forever when the chamber was refurbished .
leonardo 's work has been copied by rubens and michelangelo 's by bastiano da sangallo .
michelangelo was commissioned by angelo doni to paint a " holy family " as a present for his wife , maddalena strozzi .
it hangs in the uffizi gallery in its original magnificent frame , which michelangelo may have designed .
he also may have painted the madonna and child with john the baptist , known as the " manchester madonna " and now in the national gallery , london .
michelangelo was invited to rome by the newly elected pope julius ii in 1505 .
michelangelo was not able to do much work in the tomb .
michelangelo worked on the tomb for 40 years .
it is in the church of san pietro in vincoli in rome .
two of the other statues in the tomb are now in the louvre .
michelangelo painted the ceiling of the sistine chapel .
bramante , who was working on the building of st . peter 's basilica , resented michelangelo 's commission for the pope 's tomb .
michelangelo was originally to paint the twelve apostles on the ceiling .
michelangelo persuaded pope julius to give him a free hand .
the work is part of a larger scheme of decoration within the chapel .
it is over 500 square metres of ceiling .
the book of genesis is divided into three groups : god 's creation of the earth , god 's creation of humankind and their fall from god 's grace , and lastly , the state of humanity as represented by noah and his family .
on the pendentives supporting the ceiling are painted twelve men and women who prophesied the coming of jesus , seven prophets of israel , and five sibyls , prophetic women of the classical world .
adam , adam and eve are the most famous paintings on the ceiling .
in 1513 , pope julius ii died and was succeeded by pope leo x .
he was asked to paint the marble in florence to be there .
he agreed reluctantly and spent three years creating drawings and models for the facade , as well as attempting to open a new marble quarry at pietrasanta .
in 1520 the work was abruptly cancelled by his financially strapped patrons before any real progress had been made .
the basilica lacks a facade .
in 1520 , the medici came back to michelangelo .
for posterity , this project , occupying the artist for much of the 1520s and 1530s , was more fully realised .
michelangelo used michelangelo to create the medici chapel , which houses the tombs of two of the younger members of the medici family , giuliano , duke of nemours , and lorenzo , his nephew .
it also serves to commemorate their more famous predecessors , lorenzo the magnificent and his brother giuliano , who are buried nearby .
the tombs display statues of the two medici and allegorical figures representing night and day , and dusk and dawn .
the chapel also has michelangelo 's " medici madonna " .
in 1976 a concealed corridor was found .
pope leo x died in 1521 and was succeeded briefly by the austere adrian vi .
in 1524 , michelangelo received an official job from the medici pope for the laurentian library at san lorenzo 's church .
he designed both the interior of the library itself and its vestibule .
it was left to assistants to interpret his plans and instruction .
the library was not opened until 1571 , and the vestibule remained incomplete until 1904 .
in 1527 , the people of florence were encouraged by the sack of rome , throwing out the medici and restored the republic .
michelangelo worked on the city 's fortifications from 1528 to 1529 .
the city fell in 1530 , and the medici were restored to power .
michelangelo fell out of favour with the young alessandro medici , who had been made the first duke of florence .
fearing for his life , he fled to rome .
despite michelangelo 's support of the republic and resistance to the medici rule , he was welcomed by pope clement , who reinstated an allowance that he had previously granted the artist and made a new contract with him over the tomb of pope julius .
michelangelo lived near the church of santa maria di loreto .
he met vittoria colonna , marchioness of pescara , who was to become one of his closest friends until her death in 1547 .
in 1534 , pope clement vii made michelangelo paint a fresco of " the last judgement " on the altar wall of the sistine chapel .
michelangelo worked on the project from 1534 to 1541 .
the fresco depicts the second coming of christ and his judgement of the souls .
michelangelo ignored the usual artistic conventions in portraying jesus , showing him as a massive , muscular figure , youthful , beardless and naked .
he is surrounded by saints , among whom st . bartholomew holds a drooping flayed skin , bearing the likeness of michelangelo .
the dead rise from their graves , to be consigned either to heaven or to hell .
cardinal carafa and monsignor serninivius mantua 's ambassador abroad campaigned to have the fresco removed or censored , but the pope resisted .
in 1564 , michelangelo 's nephew , edward michelangelo , took the place of michelangelo 's genitals and daniele da volterra , an apprentice of michelangelo .
it is in the capodimonte museum of naples .
michelangelo worked hard at the statue .
they included a design for the capitoline hill with its trapezoid piazza displaying the ancient bronze statue of marcus aurelius .
he designed the upper floor of the palazzo farnese and the interior of the church of santa maria degli angeli .
other architectural works include san giovanni fiorentini , the sforza chapelicative capella sforzadillytt in the basilica di santa maria maggiore and the porta pia .
michelangelo was still working on the " last judgement " .
it shows significant events in the lives of the two most important saints of rome , the " conversion of saint paul " and the " crucifixion of saint peter " .
like the " last judgement " , these two works are complex compositions with many figures .
the couple were finished in 1550 .
giorgio vasari published his " vita " , a biography of michelangelo .
in 1546 , michelangelo was made the architect of st . peter 's basilica .
in 1506 , the building of bramante was finished .
successive architects had worked on it , but not much progress had been made .
michelangelo was made the architect .
he developed his ideas for a centrally planned church , strengthening the structure both physically and visually .
the dome was not completed until after his death .
michelangelo was worried that michelangelo would pass away before the dome was finished .
once building started on the lower part of the dome , the supporting ring was finished .
michelangelo 's " basilica " was the last made by michelangelo to be discovered in the vatican library .
it is extremely rare , since he destroyed his designs later in life .
the sketch is a partial plan for one of the radial columns of the cupola drum of saint peter 's .
michelangelo was a devout catholic .
his poetry includes the following closing lines from what is known as poem 285 [mask] written in 1554dillydillydilly ; " neither painting nor sculpture will be able to calm my soul , now turned toward that divine love that opened his arms on the cross to take us in . "
michelangelo was abstemious in his personal life .
condivi said he was not interested in food and drink , eating " more out of necessity than of pleasure " and that he " often slept in his clothes and boots . "
his biographer paolo giovio says , " his nature was so rough and uncouth that his domestic habits were incredibly squalid , and deprived posterity of any pupils who might have followed him . "
he may not have minded , since he was a solitary and melancholy person , " bizzarro e fantastico , " a man who " withdrew himself from the company of men . "
it is impossible to know whether michelangelo had physical relationships between michelangelo and his wife , and that the nature of his sexuality is made apparent in his poetry .
he wrote over three hundred sonnets .
michelangelo was 23 years old when michelangelo met him in 1532 , at the age of 57 .
they are usually addressed by one man to another .
never have i loved a man more than i love you , never have i wished for a friendship more than i wish for yours . "
he was devoted to michelangelo .
michelangelo met cecchino dei bracci in 1542 .
some of the objects of michelangelo 's affections , and subjects of his poetry , took advantage of him .
the poetry is a source of discomfort to later generations .
michelangelo ’ s greatnephew , michelangelo buonarroti the younger , published the poems in 1623 with the gender of pronouns changed .
even in modern times , some scholars continue to say that despite the restoration of the pronouns , they represent " an emotionless and elegant re-imagining of platonic dialogue , whereby erotic poetry was seen as an expression of refined sensibilities " .
michelangelo was in rome in 1536 or 1538 .
they wrote sonnets for each other .
these sonnets mostly deal with the spiritual problems that lived in them .
michelangelo did not kiss the widow 's face in the same manner that he had her hand .
the " madonna of the steps " is michelangelo 's earliest known work in marble .
it is carved in shallow relief .
the child shows a twisting motion that was to become characteristic of michelangelo 's work .
the " taddeo tondo " of 1502 shows the christ child frightened by a bullfinch , a symbol of the crucifixion .
raphael made the lively form of the child .
the " bruges madonna " was , at the time of its creation , unlike other such statues depicting the virgin proudly presenting her son .
here , the christ child is about to step off into the world .
the " doni tondo " , depicting the holy family , has elements of all three previous works : the frieze of figures in the background has the appearance of a low-relief , while the circular shape and dynamic forms echo the taddeo tondo .
the twisting motion in the " bruges madonna " is accentuated in the painting .
michelangelo was to employ the paintings on the ceiling of the sistine chapel .
the kneeling angel is an early work in the church .
several other artists had worked on the scheme , beginning with nicola pisano in the 13th century .
in the late 15th century , the project was managed by niccolo dell ' arca .
an angel holding a candlestick , by niccolo , was already in place .
the two angels form a pair of beautiful men , but there is a great contrast between the two works .
everything about michelangelo 's angel is very dynamic .
michelangelo 's " bacchus " was a commission with a specified subject , the youthful god of wine .
the sculpture has all the traditional attributes , a vine wreath , a cup of wine and a fawn .
the work is dangerously inspired by classical sculpture .
michelangelo utilised the figure with marked contraposto to suggest a particular human state , in this case waking from sleep .
with the rebellious slave , it is one of two such earlier figures for the tomb of pope julius ii , now in the louvre .
rodin had studied them at the louvre .
the " bound slave " is one of the later figures for pope julius 's tomb .
the works , known as " the captives " , each show the figure struggling to free itself , as if from the bonds of the rock in which it is lodged .
michelangelo used the way he saw in the rock .
the ceiling of the sistine chapel was painted between 1508 and 1512 .
the ceiling is a flattened barrel vault .
pope julius ii appointed michelangelo toorn the pendentives with figures of the twelve apostles .
michelangelo was not willing to take the job .
the resultant scheme of decoration awed his contemporaries and has inspired other artists ever since .
the story of the book of genesis is nine panels illustrating episodes from the book of genesis , set in an architectonic frame .
michelangelo replaced the proposed apostles with prophets and sibyls who heralded the coming of the messiah .
michelangelo began painting with the later episodes in the story .
michelangelo made the figures larger .
one of the central images , " the creation of adam " is one of the best known and most reproduced works in the history of art .
the final panel was painted in a single day .
as the model for the creator , michelangelo has depicted himself in the action of painting the ceiling .
michelangelo painted twenty youths who have variously been interpreted as angels , as muses , or simply as decoration .
they called michelangelo " ignudi " .
the figure reproduced may be seen in context in the above image of the separation of light from darkness .
michelangelo made studies of the ceiling , and michelangelo made studies for different figures .
the prophet jeremiah is a picture of the artist himself .
michelangelo 's relief of the " battle of the centaurs " , created while he was still a youth associated with the medici academy , is an unusually complex relief in that it shows a great number of figures involved in a vigorous struggle .
such a complex disarray of figures was rare in florentine art , where it would usually only be found in images showing either the massacre of innocents or the torments of hell .
the relief treatment , in which some of the figures are boldly projecting , may indicate michelangelo 's familiarity with roman sarcophagus reliefs from the collection of lorenzo medici , and similar marble panels created by nicola and giovanni pisano , and with the figurative compositions on ghiberti 's baptistry doors .
the composition of the " battle of cascina " , is known only from copies , as the original cartoon , was so admired that it got deteriorated and was eventually in pieces .
it reflects the earlier relief in the energy and diversity of the figures , with many different postures , and many being viewed from the back , as they turn towards the approaching enemy and prepare for battle .
michelangelo drew inspiration from a fresco by melozzo da forli in rome 's santi apostoli .
melozzo had depicted figures from different angles , as if they were floating in the heaven and seen from below .
melozzo 's majestic figure of christ , with windblown cloak , shows a degree of foreshortening of the figure that had also been employed by andrea mantegna , but was not usual in the frescos of florentine painters .
michelangelo had the opportunity to depict , on an unprecedented scale , figures in the action of either rising heavenward or falling and being dragged down .
michelangelo is known for writing a fresco in the " the crucifixion of st . peter " .
in the crucifixion of peter soldiers busy themselves about their assigned duty of digging a post hole and raising the cross while various people look on and discuss the events .
a group of horrified women cluster in the foreground .
in the right foreground , michelangelo walks out of the painting with an expression of disillusionment .
michelangelo 's architectural commissions included a number that were not realised , notably the facade for brunelleschi 's church of san lorenzo in florence , for which michelangelo had a wooden model constructed , but which remains unfinished rough brick .
later , pope clement vii commissioned him to design the medici chapel and the tombs of giuliano and lorenzo medici .
michelangelo also designed the extraordinary vestibule with columns recessed into niches , and a staircase that appears to spill out of the library like a flow of lava .
michelangelo designed the building of the campidoglio in 1546 .
in 1547 he took on the job of completing st peter 's basilica , begun to a design by bramante , and with several intermediate designs by several architects .
michelangelo returned to bramante 's design , retaining the basic form and concepts by simplifying and strengthening the design to create a more dynamic and unified whole .
the dome of michelangelo 's model is somewhat ovoid .
michelangelo 's " pietas " reflects the mortality of the poor .
they are heralded by the " victory " , perhaps created for the tomb of pope julius ii .
in this group , victor overcomes an older hooded figure , with the features of michelangelo .
the pieta of vittoria colonna is a chalk drawing of a type described as " presentation drawings " .
in this image , mary 's upraise arms and upraised hands are indicative of her prophetic role .
the frontal aspect is reminiscent of masaccio 's fresco of the holy trinity in the basilica of santa maria novella , florence .
in the " florentine pieta " , michelangelo again depicts himself , this time as the aged nicodemus lowering the body of jesus from the cross into the arms of mary magdalene .
michelangelo was the man who smashed the left arm and leg of jesus .
his pupil tiberio calcagni fixed the arm and drilled a hole in which to fix a replacement leg which was not attached .
he also worked on mary magdalene .
michelangelo 's last sculpture was made six days before his death .
the legs and a detached arm remain from the work .
as it remains , the sculpture has an abstract quality .
michelangelo died in rome in 1564 .
his body was taken from rome to be buried in the basilica of santa croce .
michelangelo is one of the three greatest painters of the renaissance .
michelangelo was younger than leonardo , and older than raphael by eight .
because of his reclusive nature , he had little to do with either artist and outlived both of them by more than forty years .
michelangelo took only a few students .
he hired francesco granacci , who was his fellow pupil at the medici academy .
michelangelo was very skilled , and he used the more manual tasks .
despite this , his works were to have a great influence on painters , sculptors and architects for many generations to come .
michelangelo 's " david " is the most famous male nude of all time .
the twisting forms and tensions of the " victory " , the " bruges madonna " and the " medici madonna " make them the heralds of the mannerist art .
the unfinished giants for the tomb of pope julius ii had profound effect on late-19th and 20th-century sculptors such as rodin and henry moore .
michelangelo 's foyer of the laurentian library was one of the earliest buildings to use classical forms in a plastic .
this dynamic quality was later found in michelangelo 's centrally planned st peter 's , with its giant order , its rip cornice and its upward-launching pointed dome .
the dome of st peter 's was to influence the building of churches for many centuries , including the church of st . peter .
artists who were directly influenced by michelangelo include raphael , whose monumental treatment of the figure in the " school of athens " and " the expulsion of heliodorus from the temple " owes much to michelangelo , and whose fresco of " isaiah " in sant ' agostino closely imitates the older master 's prophets .
other artists , such as pontormo , drew on the writhing forms of the " last judgement " and the frescoes of the capella paolina .
the sistine chapel ceiling was a work of unprecedented grandeur , both for its architectonic forms , to be copied by many baroque ceiling painters , and also for the wealth of its inventiveness in the study of figures .
