he was considered by many the greatest artist of his lifetime .
when michelangelo was a boy , he was sent to florence to study grammar .
the city of florence is one of the most important centre of the arts and learning .
art was sponsored by the signorialong the town council antilles , the merchant guilds , and wealthy patrons such as the medici and their banking associates .
the renaissance was a renewal of classical scholarship and the arts .
in the 15th century , the architect filippo brunelleschi , had studied the remains of classical buildings in rome .
michelangelo was to describe michelangelo as “ the gates of paradise ” .
the outside niches of the church of orsanmichele contained a gallery of works by the most famous sculptors of florence : donatello , ghiberti , andrea del verrocchio , and nanni di banco .
the next year , his father persuaded ghirlandaio to pay michelangelo as an artist .
when in 1489 , lorenzo de ' medici , the head of state , asked ghirlandaio for his two best pupils , ghirlandaio sent michelangelo and francesco granacci .
lorenzo de ' medici died on 8 april 1492 .
michelangelo went back to his father 's house .
in the next months , he carved a polychrome wooden crucifix , as a gift to the prior of the florentine church of santo spirito , which had allowed him to do some anatomical studies of the corpses from the church 's hospital .
between 1493 and 1494 , he bought a block of marble , and carved a larger-than-life statue of hercules , which was sent to france and disappeared sometime in the 18th century .
in bologna , he was commissioned to carve several of the last small figures for the completion of the shrine of st dominic , in the church dedicated to that saint .
michelangelo studied the robust reliefs carved by jacopo della quercia around main portal of the basilica of st petronius .
the city was no longer in danger as charles viii had defeats .
michelangelo returned to florence but was not paid for by the new city government .
during the half year he spent in florence , he worked on two small statues , a child " st . john the baptist " and a sleeping " cupid " .
this was so successful in selling his sculpture abroad as well as the conservative florentine situation may have encouraged michelangelo to accept the invitation of the bishop .
on 4 july of the same year , he began work on a commission for cardinal raffaele riario , an over-life-sized statue of the roman wine god " bacchus " .
in november 1497 , the french ambassador to the holy see , cardinal jean de bilheres-lagraulas , commissioned him to carve a " pieta " , a sculpture showing the virgin mary grieving over the body of jesus .
it was soon to be thought as one of the world 's great masterpieces of sculpture , " a revelation of all the potentialities and force of the art of sculpture " .
vasari said that " it is certainly a miracle that a formless block of stone could have been reduced to a perfection that nature is scarcely able to create in the flesh . "
michelangelo returned to florence in 1499 .
the republic was changing after the fall of its leader , anti-renaissance priest girolamo savonarola , who was executed in 1498 , and the rise of the " gonfaloniere " piero soderini .
michelangelo was asked by the consuls of the guild of wool to complete an unfinished project begun 40 years agostino di duccio .
michelangelo responded by completing his most famous work , the statue of david , in 1504 .
the masterwork finally established his prominence as a sculptor of extraordinary technical skill and strength of symbolic imagination .
it now stands in the academia while a replica is in the square .
leonardo da vinci painted the battle of anghiara in the palazzo vecchio in 1504 .
michelangelo was then commissioned to paint the " battle of cascina " .
michelangelo is attacked by soldiers in the river .
michelangelo was commissioned by angelo doni to paint a " holy family " as a present for his wife , maddalena strozzi .
michelangelo was invited to rome by the newly elected pope julius ii in 1505 .
michelangelo was not able to do much work in the tomb .
michelangelo worked on the tomb for 40 years .
two of the other statues in the tomb are now in the louvre .
bramante , who was working on the building of st . peter 's basilica , resented michelangelo 's commission for the pope 's tomb .
the work is part of a larger scheme of decoration within the chapel .
the book of genesis is divided into three groups : god 's creation of the earth , god 's creation of humankind and their fall from god 's grace , and lastly , the state of humanity as represented by noah and his family .
on the pendentives supporting the ceiling are painted twelve men and women who prophesied the coming of jesus , seven prophets of israel , and five sibyls , prophetic women of the classical world .
in 1513 , pope julius ii died and was succeeded by pope leo x .
he was asked to paint the marble in florence to be there .
he agreed reluctantly and spent three years creating drawings and models for the facade , as well as attempting to open a new marble quarry at pietrasanta .
in 1520 the work was abruptly cancelled by his financially strapped patrons before any real progress had been made .
michelangelo used michelangelo to create the medici chapel , which houses the tombs of two of the younger members of the medici family , giuliano , duke of nemours , and lorenzo , his nephew .
the tombs display statues of the two medici and allegorical figures representing night and day , and dusk and dawn .
in 1524 , michelangelo received an official job from the medici pope for the laurentian library at san lorenzo 's church .
the library was not opened until 1571 , and the vestibule remained incomplete until 1904 .
in 1527 , the people of florence were encouraged by the sack of rome , throwing out the medici and restored the republic .
michelangelo worked on the city 's fortifications from 1528 to 1529 .
the city fell in 1530 , and the medici were restored to power .
michelangelo fell out of favour with the young alessandro medici , who had been made the first duke of florence .
despite michelangelo 's support of the republic and resistance to the medici rule , he was welcomed by pope clement , who reinstated an allowance that he had previously granted the artist and made a new contract with him over the tomb of pope julius .
michelangelo lived near the church of santa maria di loreto .
he met vittoria colonna , marchioness of pescara , who was to become one of his closest friends until her death in 1547 .
in 1534 , pope clement vii made michelangelo paint a fresco of " the last judgement " on the altar wall of the sistine chapel .
michelangelo worked on the project from 1534 to 1541 .
the fresco depicts the second coming of christ and his judgement of the souls .
he is surrounded by saints , among whom st . bartholomew holds a drooping flayed skin , bearing the likeness of michelangelo .
in 1564 , michelangelo 's nephew , edward michelangelo , took the place of michelangelo 's genitals and daniele da volterra , an apprentice of michelangelo .
they included a design for the capitoline hill with its trapezoid piazza displaying the ancient bronze statue of marcus aurelius .
he designed the upper floor of the palazzo farnese and the interior of the church of santa maria degli angeli .
other architectural works include san giovanni fiorentini , the sforza chapelicative capella sforzadillytt in the basilica di santa maria maggiore and the porta pia .
like the " last judgement " , these two works are complex compositions with many figures .
the couple were finished in 1550 .
giorgio vasari published his " vita " , a biography of michelangelo .
in 1546 , michelangelo was made the architect of st . peter 's basilica .
the dome was not completed until after his death .
once building started on the lower part of the dome , the supporting ring was finished .
his poetry includes the following closing lines from what is known as poem 285 [mask] written in 1554dillydillydilly ; " neither painting nor sculpture will be able to calm my soul , now turned toward that divine love that opened his arms on the cross to take us in . "
condivi said he was not interested in food and drink , eating " more out of necessity than of pleasure " and that he " often slept in his clothes and boots . "
he may not have minded , since he was a solitary and melancholy person , " bizzarro e fantastico , " a man who " withdrew himself from the company of men . "
it is impossible to know whether michelangelo had physical relationships between michelangelo and his wife , and that the nature of his sexuality is made apparent in his poetry .
michelangelo was 23 years old when michelangelo met him in 1532 , at the age of 57 .
they are usually addressed by one man to another .
michelangelo ’ s greatnephew , michelangelo buonarroti the younger , published the poems in 1623 with the gender of pronouns changed .
even in modern times , some scholars continue to say that despite the restoration of the pronouns , they represent " an emotionless and elegant re-imagining of platonic dialogue , whereby erotic poetry was seen as an expression of refined sensibilities " .
the " madonna of the steps " is michelangelo 's earliest known work in marble .
the " bruges madonna " was , at the time of its creation , unlike other such statues depicting the virgin proudly presenting her son .
the " doni tondo " , depicting the holy family , has elements of all three previous works : the frieze of figures in the background has the appearance of a low-relief , while the circular shape and dynamic forms echo the taddeo tondo .
the kneeling angel is an early work in the church .
several other artists had worked on the scheme , beginning with nicola pisano in the 13th century .
in the late 15th century , the project was managed by niccolo dell ' arca .
the two angels form a pair of beautiful men , but there is a great contrast between the two works .
the sculpture has all the traditional attributes , a vine wreath , a cup of wine and a fawn .
michelangelo utilised the figure with marked contraposto to suggest a particular human state , in this case waking from sleep .
with the rebellious slave , it is one of two such earlier figures for the tomb of pope julius ii , now in the louvre .
the works , known as " the captives " , each show the figure struggling to free itself , as if from the bonds of the rock in which it is lodged .
the ceiling of the sistine chapel was painted between 1508 and 1512 .
the ceiling is a flattened barrel vault .
the story of the book of genesis is nine panels illustrating episodes from the book of genesis , set in an architectonic frame .
one of the central images , " the creation of adam " is one of the best known and most reproduced works in the history of art .
as the model for the creator , michelangelo has depicted himself in the action of painting the ceiling .
michelangelo painted twenty youths who have variously been interpreted as angels , as muses , or simply as decoration .
the figure reproduced may be seen in context in the above image of the separation of light from darkness .
michelangelo 's relief of the " battle of the centaurs " , created while he was still a youth associated with the medici academy , is an unusually complex relief in that it shows a great number of figures involved in a vigorous struggle .
such a complex disarray of figures was rare in florentine art , where it would usually only be found in images showing either the massacre of innocents or the torments of hell .
the relief treatment , in which some of the figures are boldly projecting , may indicate michelangelo 's familiarity with roman sarcophagus reliefs from the collection of lorenzo medici , and similar marble panels created by nicola and giovanni pisano , and with the figurative compositions on ghiberti 's baptistry doors .
the composition of the " battle of cascina " , is known only from copies , as the original cartoon , was so admired that it got deteriorated and was eventually in pieces .
it reflects the earlier relief in the energy and diversity of the figures , with many different postures , and many being viewed from the back , as they turn towards the approaching enemy and prepare for battle .
melozzo 's majestic figure of christ , with windblown cloak , shows a degree of foreshortening of the figure that had also been employed by andrea mantegna , but was not usual in the frescos of florentine painters .
michelangelo had the opportunity to depict , on an unprecedented scale , figures in the action of either rising heavenward or falling and being dragged down .
michelangelo is known for writing a fresco in the " the crucifixion of st . peter " .
in the crucifixion of peter soldiers busy themselves about their assigned duty of digging a post hole and raising the cross while various people look on and discuss the events .
michelangelo 's architectural commissions included a number that were not realised , notably the facade for brunelleschi 's church of san lorenzo in florence , for which michelangelo had a wooden model constructed , but which remains unfinished rough brick .
later , pope clement vii commissioned him to design the medici chapel and the tombs of giuliano and lorenzo medici .
michelangelo also designed the extraordinary vestibule with columns recessed into niches , and a staircase that appears to spill out of the library like a flow of lava .
michelangelo designed the building of the campidoglio in 1546 .
in 1547 he took on the job of completing st peter 's basilica , begun to a design by bramante , and with several intermediate designs by several architects .
in this group , victor overcomes an older hooded figure , with the features of michelangelo .
the pieta of vittoria colonna is a chalk drawing of a type described as " presentation drawings " .
the frontal aspect is reminiscent of masaccio 's fresco of the holy trinity in the basilica of santa maria novella , florence .
in the " florentine pieta " , michelangelo again depicts himself , this time as the aged nicodemus lowering the body of jesus from the cross into the arms of mary magdalene .
michelangelo was the man who smashed the left arm and leg of jesus .
his pupil tiberio calcagni fixed the arm and drilled a hole in which to fix a replacement leg which was not attached .
michelangelo 's last sculpture was made six days before his death .
the legs and a detached arm remain from the work .
michelangelo died in rome in 1564 .
his body was taken from rome to be buried in the basilica of santa croce .
because of his reclusive nature , he had little to do with either artist and outlived both of them by more than forty years .
michelangelo was very skilled , and he used the more manual tasks .
despite this , his works were to have a great influence on painters , sculptors and architects for many generations to come .
michelangelo 's foyer of the laurentian library was one of the earliest buildings to use classical forms in a plastic .
this dynamic quality was later found in michelangelo 's centrally planned st peter 's , with its giant order , its rip cornice and its upward-launching pointed dome .
the dome of st peter 's was to influence the building of churches for many centuries , including the church of st . peter .
artists who were directly influenced by michelangelo include raphael , whose monumental treatment of the figure in the " school of athens " and " the expulsion of heliodorus from the temple " owes much to michelangelo , and whose fresco of " isaiah " in sant ' agostino closely imitates the older master 's prophets .
other artists , such as pontormo , drew on the writhing forms of the " last judgement " and the frescoes of the capella paolina .
the sistine chapel ceiling was a work of unprecedented grandeur , both for its architectonic forms , to be copied by many baroque ceiling painters , and also for the wealth of its inventiveness in the study of figures .