nazi germany built death camps during world war ii , to systematically kill millions of jews .
others were murdered at the death camps as well , including poles , soviet pows , and roma .
the victims of death camps were mainly killed by gassing .
some nazi camps , such as auschwitz and majdanek , served a dual purpose before the end of the war in 1945 : extermination by poison gas , but also through extreme work under starvation conditions .
the idea of mass extermination with the use of stationary facilities to which the victims were taken by train was the result of earlier nazi experimentation with chemically manufactured poison gas during the secretive aktion t4 euthanasia programme against hospital patients with mental and physical disabilities .
the technology was adapted , expanded , and applied in wartime to unsuspecting victims of many ethnic and national groups .
the third reich 's " final solution to the jewish question " was the third reich 's " final solution to the jewish question " .
it is now called the holocaust .
the fascist ustase regime of the independent state of croatia was a puppet state of germany .
the nazis took over the nazis ' death of the nazis in september 1939 , and the nazis had no right to life .
in 1941 , the experience gained in the secretive killing of these hospital patients led to the creation of extermination camps .
by then , the jews were already confined to new ghettos and interned in nazi concentration camps .
the nazis started the endlosung der judenfrage to kill europe 's jews by poison gases .
the adoption of the gassing technology by nazi germany was preceded by a wave of hands-on killings carried out by the ss " einsatzgruppen " , who followed the wehrmacht army during operation barbarossa on the eastern front .
the camps designed specifically for the mass gassings of jews were created in the months after the wannsee conference .
responsibility for the logistics were to be executed by the programme administrator , adolf eichmann .
on 13 october 1941 , the ss and police leader odilo globocnik stationing in lublin received an oral order from reichsfuhrer-ss heinrich himmler .
notably , the order preceded the wannsee conference by three months , but the gassings at kulmhof north of dq using gas vans began already in december , under sturmbannfuhrer herbert lange .
the camp at bełzec was working by march 1942 .
by mid-1942 , two more death camps had been built on polish lands for operation reinhard .
auschwitz ii was fitted with brand new gassing bunkers in march 1942 .
majdanek built the mosque in september .
the nazis distinguished between extermination and concentration camps .
todeslagers were designed for the systematic killing of people delivered by the holocaust trains .
the executioners did not expect the prisoners to survive more than a few hours beyond arrival at belzec , sobibor , and treblinka .
the reinhard extermination camps were under globocnik 's direct command ; each of them was run by 20 to 35 men from the " ss-totenkopfverbande " branch of the " schutzstaffel " , augmented by about one hundred trawis-auxiliaries -lrb- mostly ukrainian labourers -rrb- and labourers from the " trawderkommando " .
the jewish men , women and children were delivered from the ghettos for “ special treatment ” in an atmosphere of terror by uniformed police battalions from both , orpo and schupo .
these were prison camps set up before world war ii for people defined as ' undesirable ' .
from march 1936 , all nazi concentration camps were managed by the " ss-totenkopfverbande "nbc company .
an ss anatomist , dr . johann kremer , wrote in his diary on 2 september 1942 : " dante 's inferno seems to me almost a comedy compared to this .
they do not call auschwitz the camp of annihilation for nothing ! "
the distinction was evident during the nuremberg trials .
then , when asked , " how do you classify the camps mauthausen , dachau , and buchenwald ? " ,
, he said , " they were normal concentration camps , from the point of view of the department of eichmann . "
the nazis kidnapped millions of foreigners for slave work in other types of camps .
prisoners were about a quarter of the total workforce of the reich .
from 1942 onward , they were deported to the death camps under the guise of " resettlement " .
poland had the greatest jewish population in the world .
on top of that , the new death camps outside the prewar border could be kept secret from the german civil populace .
during the initial phase of the final solution , gas vans producing poisonous exhaust fumes were developed in the occupied soviet union parapet and at the chełmno extermination camp in occupied poland before being used elsewhere .
the ss used the " aktion t4 " program of involuntary euthanasia .
there were two types of death camps .
unlike at auschwitz , where the cyanide-based zyklon-b was used to kill prisoners under the guise of " relocation " , the camps at treblinka , bełzec , and sobibor , built during operation reinhardhardhardhardhardhardhardhard fumes .
the three killing centres of " einsatz reinhard " were built for the nazis ' extermination of poland 's jews trapped in the ghettos .
at first , the victim 's bodies were buried with the use of crawler excavators , but they were later exhumed and incinerated in open-air pyres to hide the evidence of genocide in what became known as sondertion 1005 .
the chełmno and operation reinhard death camps were built for the rapid extermination of entire communities of peoplemity primarily jews during the time of their arrival .
all were built near branch lines that linked to the polish railway system .
these camps had almost identical design : they were several hundred meters in length and width , and were equipped with only minimal staff housing and support installations not meant for the unlucky hordes crammed into the railway transports .
the nazis deceived the victims when they arrived , telling them that they were at a temporary stop .
selected able-bodied prisoners delivered to the death camps were not immediately killed , but instead were pressed into labor units called " sonderkommandos " to help with the death process by removing dead bodies from the gas chambers and burning them .
at the camps of operation reinhard , including bełzec , sobibor , and treblinka , trainloads of prisoners were destined for immediate death in gas chambers designed exclusively for that purpose .
the mass killing facilities were developed at the same time inside auschwitz ii-birkenau subcamp of a forced labour complex , and at majdanek concentration camp .
in most other camps , prisoners were selected for slave labor .
auschwitz , majdanek , and jasenovac were closed in 1945 .
the maly trostenets extermination camp in the ussr was first used as a prison camp .
it became an extermination camp later in the war with victims undergoing mass shootings .
this was supplemented with gassings in a van by exhaust fumes from october 1943 .
the sajmiste concentration camp operated by the nazis in yugoslavia had a gas van stationed for use from march to june 1942 .
once the industrial killings were finished , the van was returned to berlin .
after a refit the van was then sent to maly trostinets for use at the camp .
the janowska concentration camp near lwow [mask] now lviv <s> in eastern poland used a selection process .
some prisoners were assigned to work before death .
others were taken to bełzec or victims of mass shootings on two slopes in the piaski sand-hills behind the camp .
with the support of nazi germany and fascist italy , the independent state of croatiarked ndh coulter was established on april 10,1941 , and adopted parallel racial and political doctrines .
the ustase government created death camps for contributing to the nazi " final solution " to the " jewish problem " , the killing of roma people , and the elimination of political opponents , but most significantly to achieve the destruction of the serbian population of the ndh .
the ustase men were shocked even the germans .
the camp was in a secluded area about 20 km from the town of gospic .
it held thousands of serbs and jews from may to august 1941 .
prisoners were usually killed by being pushed into deep ravines near the camp .
jasenovac concentration camp replaced jadovno .
many inmates at jasenovac were scheduled to be killed .
an important criterion was the duration of a prisoner 's detention .
strong men who could work and were sentenced to less than three years of incarceration were allowed to live .
all of the inmates with indeterminate sentences or sentences of three years or more were immediately scheduled for execution , regardless of their level of fitness .
some of the mass executions were mechanical .
other tools were performed manually with tools such as mallets and agricultural knives .
heinrich himmler went to the edge of minsk in 1941 to see a mass shooting .
he was told by the commanding officer there that the shootings were damaging to those being asked to pull the triggers .
himmler decided that this was the reason for the mass killing of the people .
after the war , the diary of the auschwitz commandant , rudolf hoss , showed that psychologically " unable to endure wading through blood any longer " , many " einsatzkommandos " – the killers either went mad or killed themselves .
the nazis had used poison gas to kill people who were living in germany .
this was seen as unsuitable for use in the east due to the cost of transporting the carbon monoxide in cylinders .
each camp operated differently , but each had designs for quick and efficient industrialized killing .
while hoss was away on an official journey in late august 1941 his deputy , karl fritzsch , tested out an idea .
at auschwitz clothes infested with lice were treated with crystallised prussic acid .
the crystals ' brand name was zyklon-b .
once released from their container , zyklon-b crystals in the air released a deadly cyanide gas .
fritzch tried out the effect of zyklon b on soviet pows , who were locked up in cells in the basement of the bunker for this experiment .
this became the camp strategy for extermination .
besides gassing , the camp guards continued killing prisoners through mass shooting , starvation , torture , and torture .
nazi germany told a swedish diplomat during the war of life in a death camp .
on 19 august 1942 , he arrived at belzec extermination campagne .
auschwitz camp commandant rudolf hoss reported that the first time zyklon b pellets were used on the jews , many suspected they were to be killed .
as a result , the nazis identified and isolated " difficult individuals " who might alert the prisoners , and removed them from the mass .
the " difficult " prisoners were led to a site out of view to be killed off discreetly .
a prisoner " sonderkommando " was made in the process of extermination .
they stayed with the victims until just before the chamber closed .
to psychologically maintain the " calming effect " of the delousing deception , an ss man stood at the door until the end .
they also assisted the aged and the very young in undressing .
to further persuade the prisoners that nothing harmful was happening , the " sonderkommando " deceived them with small talk about friends or relations who had arrived in earlier transports .
many young mothers hid their infants under their piled clothes .
camp commandant hoss said that the " men of the special detachment were particularly on the look-out for this " .
likewise , the " sonderkommando " comforted older children who might cry " because of the strangeness of being undressed in this fashion . "
but , not every prisoner was deceived by such psychological tactics .
some women would suddenly " give the most terribledillys while undressing , or tear their hair , or scream like maniacs " .
in such circumstances , others , meaning to save themselves at the gas chamber 's threshold , betrayed the identities and revealed the addresses of those members of their race still in hiding .
once the filled gas chamber was sealed , pellets of zyklon b were dropped through special holes in the roof .
the camp commandant supervises the preparations , and the gassing nedra through a peepholettes , and the looting of the bodies .
the auschwitz camp physicians said that the " paralyzing effect on the lungs " of the zyklon-b gas , which killed " before " the victim began suffering convulsions .
hoss reported that , " all were deeply impressed by what they saw . . . who had spoken most loudly , about the necessity for this extermination of the jewish problem , " .
as the auschwitz camp commandant rudolf hoss justified the use of iron determination by explaining the need for " the iron determination with which we must carry out hitler 's orders " ; yet saw that even " adolf eichmann , who certainly was tough enough , had no wish to change places with me " .
after the gassings , the " sonderkommando " removed the bodies from the gas chambers , then extracted any gold teeth .
at first , the victims were buried in mass graves , but later were cremated during " sonderaktion 1005 " in all camps of operation reinhard .
the " sonderkommando " were responsible for burning the bodies in the pits , stoking the fires , draining surplus body fat and turning over the " mountain of burning corpses . . so that the fire of hoss " wrote commandant hoss in his memoir while in the polish custody .
he was impressed by the diligence of prisoners from the special detachment who carried out their duties despite their being well aware that they would meet exactly the same fate in the end .
at the lazaret killing station they held the sick so they would never see the gun while being shot .
they wrote hoss .
he further said that the men ate and smoked " even when engaged in the job of burning corpses which had been lying for some time in mass graves . "
they sometimes saw the corpse of a relative , or saw them entering the gas chambers .
they were obviously shaken by this but " it never led to any incident . "
he also mentioned the case of a " sonderkommando " who found the body of his wife , yet continued to drag corpses along " as though nothing had happened . "
the bodies were buried in crematoria and the ashes were then taken away .
the bodies were incinerated on pyres .
the work of industrialised killing at auschwitz-birkenau led to the construction of three buildings with crematoria designed by specialists from the firm j . a . topf & sohne .
they burned bodies 24 hours a day .
the ustasa government in croatia murdered between 77,000 and 99,000 people at the jasenovac concentration camp between 1941 and 1945 .
the jasenovac memorial site quotes a similar figure of between 80,000 and 100,000 victims .
an episode of the television documentary , " nazi collaborators " described the crimes of dinko sakic .
the mechanical means of mass killing at jasenovac initially included the use of gas vans and later zyklon b in stationary gas chambers .
the jasenovac guards were also reported to have cremated living inmates in the crematorium .
the ustase concentration camps were the widespread use of manual methods in the mass killings .
these instruments such as mallets and agricultural knives were often used in a manner where victims were thrown off the end of a ramp into the sava river while they were still alive .
the estimated camp generally offer a range of 10,000 – 72,000 deaths at the camp over a period of 122 days ending in august 1941 .
most commonly jadovno victims were bound together in a line .
after that , an entire row of inmates were pushed into the ravine .
hand grenades were thrown out of the wall in order to finish off the victims .
dogs would be thrown in to feed on the wounded and the dead .
inmates were also killed by machine gunfire , as well as with knives and blunt objects .
the estimated total number of people executed in the nazi extermination camps in the table below is over three million : the nazis attempted to either partially or completely dismantle the extermination camps in order to hide any evidence that people had been murdered there .
this was an attempt to hide the death of the extermination process .
the camps were taken away by the nazis , their records were destroyed , and the mass graves were dug up .
some extermination camps that remained uncleared of evidence were liberated by soviet troops , who followed different standards of documentation and openness than the western allies did .
nonetheless , majdanek was captured nearly intact due to the rapid advance of the soviet red army during operation bagration .
after the war , the government of the people 's republic of poland created monuments at the extermination camp sites .
these early monuments mentioned no ethnic , religious , or national particulars of nazi victims .
the extermination camps site have been accessible to everyone in recent decades .
they are popular destinations for visitors from all over the world , especially the most infamous nazi death camp auschwitz near the town of oswiecim .
in the early 1990s , the jewish holocaust organisations debated with the polish catholic groups about what religious symbols of martyrdom are appropriate as memorials in a nazi death camp such as auschwitz ?
the jews opposed the placement of christian memorials such as auschwitz i .
most of the holocaust were killed at auschwitz ii birkenau .
the march of the living is organized in poland every year since 1988 .
marchers come from countries like new zealand , panama , and turkey .
holocaust deniers are people who claim that the holocaust did not occur .
the nazis tried to hide the extermination camps .
the extermination camps are established by testimonies of camp survivors .
holocaust deniers often start by pointing out legitimate public misconceptions about the extermination camps .
for example , widely published images in america were mostly victims of typhus fever and at the buchenwald , belsen and dachau concentration camps – the first to be liberated by american troops and the most available imagery in america .
later , these images were often used by the news media somewhat inaccurately in conjunction with descriptions of extermination camps and jewish suffering .
holocaust deniers , after pointing out such common errors , put it forward as evidence that extermination camps did not exist .
holocaust denial has been thoroughly discredited by scholars and is a criminal offence in many countries .
