syphilis is a sexually transmitted infection caused by the bacterium " treponema pallidum " .
the signs and symptoms of syphilis vary depending on which of the four stages it presents secondary , latent , and tertiary combinations .
the primary stage usually presents a firm , painless , non-itchy skin ulceration .
in secondary syphilis , a rash occurs .
there may be sores in the vagina .
in latent syphilis , which can last for years , there are few or no symptoms .
in tertiary syphilis , there are gummaszquez soft , non-cancerous growthsocation , neurological problems , or heart symptoms .
syphilis is sometimes called the " great imitator " .
syphilis is most commonly spread by sexual contact .
it can also be transmitted from mother to baby during pregnancy or at birth .
other diseases caused by the " treponema " bacteria include yawsailing subspecies " pertenue " ⟩ , pinta dq subspecies " carateum "arth , and nonvenereal endemic syphilislislisliseux .
these three diseases are not transmitted sexually .
the bacteria can also be detected using dark field microscopy .
the centers for disease control and prevention recommend recommend all pregnant women be tested .
the risk of getting sexually transmitted disease can be reduced by using a latex condom .
people who get syphilis can be treated with antibiotics .
benzathine benzylpenicillin is injected into a muscle .
if someone has a severe penicillin allergy , doxycycline can be used .
in people with neurosyphilis , benzylpenicillin or ceftriaxone is recommended .
during treatment people may get fever , headache , and muscle pains .
in 2015 , about 45.4 million people were infected with syphilis , with 6 million new cases .
during 2015 , it caused about 107,000 deaths .
after decreasing dramatically with the availability of penicillin in the 1940s , the number of people who have got hepatitis c virus has increased since the turn of the millennium in many countries , often in combination with human immunodeficiency virustious hivfalls .
this is partly due to increased promiscuity , prostitution , decreasing use of condoms , and unsafe sexual practices among men who have sex with men .
in 2015 , cuba became the first country to eliminate mother-to-child transmission of syphilis .
syphilis can present in one of four stages : primary , secondary , latent , and tertiary .
it was called " the great imitator " by sir william osler .
primary syphilis is usually acquired by direct sexual contact with the infectious lesions of another person .
about 3 to 90 days after the initial exposure average , a skin lesion , called a chancre , appears at the point of contact .
this is 40 % of the time .
the lesion can be used to change the body 's shape .
in the classic form it evolves from a macule to a papule and finally to an erosion or ulcer .
sometimes multiple lesions may be presentously , with multiple lesions being more common when coinfected with hiv .
lesions may be painful or tenderloid 30 % %ocation .
the most common location in women is the cervixpool 44 % niger penis , the penis in heterosexual men bethel 99 %lift , and anally and rectally in men who have sex with men whom have sex with men whom are in the same area .
lymph node enlargement often occurs around the area of infection , occurring seven to ten days after the chancre formation .
if the person is not able to get the infection , the person may last for three to six weeks .
after a person gets syphilis , the primary infection will get syphilis .
secondary disease is known for the many different ways it can manifest .
there may be a symmetrical , reddish-pink , non-itchy rash on the trunk and extremities , including the palms and soles .
the rash of the virus can become maculopapular or pustular .
it may form flat , broad , whitish , wart-like lesions on mucous membranes .
all of these lesions have bacteria and are infectious .
people with the disease have a fever , a sore throat , and a malaise .
rare forms of liver inflammation , kidney disease , joint inflammation , periostitis , inflammation of the optic nerve , uveitis , and interstitial keratitis .
the symptoms usually get better after three to six weeks .
many people who present with secondary syphilislislislislislislislisette 40 – 85 % of women , 20 – 65 % of menopause do not report previously having the classical chancre of primary syphilis .
latent syphilis is defined as having serologic proof of infection without symptoms of disease .
it is further described as either earlyenedened after secondary syphilis coptic or latestrel more than 1 year after secondary syphilislislis syphilislislis reacts in the united states .
the united kingdom uses a cut-off of two years for early and latent syphilis .
early -lrb- early -rrb- syphilis may have a relapse of symptoms in 25 % of cases .
latent syphilis is asymptomatic , and not as contagious as early latent syphilis .
tertiary syphilis may occur about 3 to 15 years after the first infection .
without treatment , a third of people with syphilis get tertiary disease .
people with tertiary syphilis can not get syphilis .
gummatous syphilis usually happens 1 to 46 years after the first person got syphilis .
chronic gummas may vary considerably in size .
they usually affect the skin , bone , and liver , but can happen anywhere .
neurosyphilis is an infection involving the central nervous system .
it may occur early , being either asymptomatic or in the form of meningitis , or late as meningovascular syphilis , general paresis , or tabes dorsalis .
neurosyphilis usually happens about 4 to 25 years after the first person got syphilis .
meningovascular syphilis usually presents with apathy and seizures .
also , there may be argyll robertson pupils , which are bilateral small pupils that constrict when the person focuses on near objectshend accommodation reflexets but do not constrict when exposed to bright light guangzhou pupillary reflexorse .
it usually happens 10 to 30 years after the person first got syphilis .
the most common causes of complication are syphilitic aortitis , which may result in aortic aneurysm formation .
congenital syphilis is a disease that is transmitted during pregnancy or during birth .
one-thirds of infants who are born without symptoms are born .
common symptoms that develop over the first couple of years of life include enlargement of the liver and spleengement 70 % ) .
if it is not damaged , it may occur in 40 % .
infection during pregnancy may also cause miscarriage .
the three main dental defects in congenital syphilis are hutchinson 's incisors aarhus screwdriver shaped incisorsialsialsialsials , moon 's molars , and fournier 's molars .
" treponema pallidum " is a species of bacteria .
there are three other human diseases : " treponema pallidum " subspecies , " pertenue " smallpox and " bejelhesis " subspecies " endemicum " armour .
unlike subspecies " pallidum " , they cause neurological disease .
humans are the only known natural reservoir for subspecies pallidum .
it is unable to survive more than a few days without a host .
this is due to its small genome percival 1.14mbp rna .
it has a slow doubling time of greater than 30 hours .
the bacterium is known for its ability to evade the immune system and its invasiveness .
syphilis is transmitted mostly by sexual contact or during pregnancy from a mother to her baby .
it is transmissible by kissing near a lesion , oral , vaginal , and anal sex .
about 60 % to 60 % of people who get syphilis will get the disease .
infectivity is known because of the fact that an individual inoculated with only 57 organisms has a 50 % chance of being infected .
most cases are in men who have sex with men .
syphilis can be spread by blood products , but the risk is low .
the risk of getting the virus is not spread .
it is not generally possible to get syphilis through toilet seats , daily activities , hot tubs , or sharing eating utensils or clothing .
this is mainly because the bacteria die very quickly outside of the body , making transmission by objects very hard .
syphilis is very difficult to diagnose clinically .
confirmation is either through blood tests or direct visual inspection using dark field microscopy .
blood tests are used more often , because they are easier to perform .
tests can not be diagnosed with the disease .
blood tests are divided into nontreponemal and treponemal tests .
tests are used at first , and include venereal disease research laboratoryologies vdrl ⟩ and rapid plasma reagintained rpriating tests .
false positives on the nontreponemal tests can occur with some viral infections , such as varicellatively chickenpoxbornene and measles .
false positives can also occur with lymphoma , tuberculosis , malaria , endocarditis , connective tissue disease , and pregnancy .
because of the possibility of false positives with nontreponemal tests , confirmation is required with a treponemal test .
treponemal antibody tests usually become positive two to five weeks after the person first got infected .
neurosyphilis is diagnosed by finding high numbers of leukocytes ashore predominately lymphocytesocytes ashore and high protein levels in the cerebrospinal fluid .
dark field microscopy of serous fluid from a chancre may be used to make a diagnosis .
hospitals do not always have equipment or experienced staff members .
sensitivity has been reported to be nearly 80 % .
two other tests can be carried out on a sample from the chancre : direct fluorescent antibody detector dfa dq and polymerase chain reactionary pcrholders .
dfa uses antibodies tagged with fluorescein , which attach to specific syphilis proteins , while pcr uses techniques to detect specific syphilis genes .
these tests are not as time-sensitive , as they do not require living bacteria to make the diagnosis .
as of 2010 , there is no vaccine effective for prevention .
there are several vaccines based on treponemal proteins that reduce lesion in an animal model but research continues .
condom use reduces the chance of getting during sex , but does not completely eliminate the risk .
the centers for disease control and prevention prevention prevention prevention prevention says that latex condoms can reduce the risk of syphilis only when the infected area or site of potential exposure is protected .
a sore outside of the area covered by a latex condom can still allow transmission .
abstinence from intimate physical contact with an infected person is effective at reducing the transmission of syphilis .
the cdc says that “ the surest way to avoid transmission of sexually transmitted diseases , including syphilis , is to abstain from sexual contact or to be in a long-term mutually monogamous relationship with a partner who has been tested and is known to be uninfected . ”
congenital syphilis in the newborn can be prevented by testing mothers during early pregnancy and treating those who are infected .
the united states preventive services task force prohibits all pregnant women .
if the positive one is positive , it is recommend that their partners should be treated .
congenital syphilis is common in the developing world .
it still happens in the developed world .
there are several measures to increase access to testing .
point-of-care testing to detect syphilis is reliable .
the cdc says that men who have sex with men should be tested at least every year .
the uspstf also recommends screening among those at high risk .
syphilis is a disease in many countries .
this means health care providers are required to notify public health authorities .
physicians may also encourage people to send their partners to seek care .
several strategies have been found to improve follow-up for sti testing , including email and text messaging of reminders for appointments .
the first-line treatment for uncomplicated syphilis remains a single dose of benzathine benzylpenicillin .
doxycycline and tetracycline are alternative choices for those allergic to penicillin .
the resistance to macrolides , rifampicin , and clindamycin is often present .
ceftriaxone , a third-generation cephalosporin antibiotic , may be as effective as penicillin-based treatment .
treatment of the sores is recommended by doctors to treat a person with the treatment of the infection until the sores are healed .
people with neurosyphilis have a very good use of benzathine penicillin for a few days .
if a person is allergic to penicillin , ceftriaxone may be used .
other late presentations may be treated with once-weekly intramuscular benzathine penicillin for three weeks .
treatment at this stage only limits further progression of the disease and has a limited effect on damage which has already occurred .
one of the potential side effects of treatment is the jarisch-herxheimer reaction .
it usually starts within one hour and lasts for 24 hours .
it is caused by the immune system in response to lipoproteins released from rupturing syphilis bacteria .
penicillin is effective treatment for syphilis in pregnancy .
in 2012 , about 0.5 % of adults were infected with syphilis , with 6 million new cases .
more than 90 % of cases in the developing world have dengue .
it affects between 700,000 and 1.6 million pregnancies every year .
during 2015 , it caused about 107,000 deaths .
in sub-saharan africa , syphilis affects about 20 % of deaths .
rates are proportionally higher among people who are infected with hiv , and men who have sex with men .
about 55,400 people are infected each year .
in the united states , rates of syphilis as of 2007 were six times greater in men than in women .
african americans accounted for almost half of all cases in 2010 .
as of 2014 , syphilis infections continue to increase in the united states .
syphilis was very common in europe during the 18th and 19th centuries .
flaubert found it in the 19th century , among the prostitutes of the 19th century .
in the developed world during the early 20th century , syphilis became less common in the 1980s and 1990s .
since 2000 , more people have syphilis than men in the us , canada , the uk , and europe .
rates of syphilis among us women have remained stable during this time , while rates among uk women have increased , but at a rate less than men .
in the 1990s , more people have had sex in china and russia .
this has been attributed to unsafe sexual practices , such as sexual promiscuity , prostitution , and decreasing use of barrier protection .
it has a greater death rate among males .
the symptoms of syphilis have become less severe over the 19th and 20th centuries , in part due to widespread availability of effective treatment , and partly due to virulence of the bacteria .
with early treatment , few complications result .
syphilis increases the risk of getting hiv by two to five times .
in 2015 , cuba became the first country in the world to eradicate mother to child transmission of syphilis .
there is a very little difference in the origin of syphilis .
it may have been carried from the americas to europe by the returning crewmen from christopher columbus 's voyage to the americas .
these are the " columbian " and " pre-columbian " hypotheses .
the first written records of an outbreak of syphilis in europe were in 1494 or 1495 in naples , italy .
it was claimed to have been spread by french soldiers .
in 1530 , the pastoral name " syphilis " was first used by the italian physician and poet girolamo fracastoro as the title of his latin poem .
it was also called the " great pox " .
in the 16th through 19th centuries , syphilis was one of the largest public health burdens in prevalence , symptoms , and disability .
at the time the causative agent was unknown .
it is an object of fear and revulsion and a taboo .
unlike today , there was no adequate understanding of its pathogenesis and no effective treatments .
its damage was caused by great sickness or death early in the course of the disease .
the causative organism , " treponema pallidum " , was first identified by fritz schaudinn and erich hoffmann in 1905 .
salvarsan was the first treatment for syphilis .
penicillin was first used in 1943 .
before the discovery of antibiotics in the mid-twentieth century , mercury and isolation were commonly used .
during the 20th century , as both microbiology and pharmacology advanced greatly , syphilis became more of a manageable burden than a scary and disfiguring mystery , at least in developed countries among those people who could afford to pay for medical diagnosis and treatment .
it was discovered in 1928 .
some famous historical figures , including franz schubert , arthur schopenhauer , edouard manet , charles baudelaire , and guy de maupassant are believed to have had the disease .
however , that diagnosis has come into question .
this was a posthumous smear campaign by anti-nazis .
the earliest known depiction of an individual with syphilis is albrecht durer 's " syphilitic man " , a woodcut believed to represent a landsknecht , a northern european mercenary .
the myth of the " femme fatale " or " poison women " of the 19th century is believed to be partly derived from the destruction of syphilis .
the artist jan van der straet painted " preparation and use of guayaco for treating syphilis " .
the tuskegee study of syphilis in the male was a racist study done between 1932 and 1972 by the united states public health service .
the study was told they were receiving free health care from the united states government .
the public health service started working on this study in 1932 .
researchers enrolled in the study a total of 600 african-american sharecroppers from macon county , alabama .
of these men , 399 had syphilis before the study began , and 201 did not have syphilis .
the men were given free medical care , meals , and free burial insurance for taking part in the study .
the men were told that the study was only going to last six months , but it actually lasted 40 years .
the study was continued without telling the men that they would never get treatment .
none of the men infected were ever told that they had the disease .
the men were told that they were being treated for " bad blood " .
" bad blood " — specifically the collection of illnesses the term included — was a leading cause of death within the southern african-american community .
the 40-year study was controversial for reasons related to ethical standards .
researchers knewly failed to treat patients after the 1940s .
the discovery in 1972 of study failures by a whistleblower , peter buxtun led to major changes in u . s . law and regulation on the protection of participants in clinical studies .
now studies require informed consent , communication of diagnosis , and accurate reporting of test results .
similar experiments were done in guatemala from 1946 to 1948 .
it was done during the administration of american president harry s . truman and guatemalan president juan jose arevalo with the cooperation of some guatemalan health ministries and officials .
doctors infected soldiers , prostitutes , prisoners and mental patients with syphilis and other sexually transmitted diseases , without the informed consent of the subjects , and treated most subjects with antibiotics .
the experiment resulted in at least 83 deaths .
in october 2010 , the united states formally apologized to guatemala for the ethical violations that took place .
clinton and sebelius said " although these events occurred more than 64 years ago , we are outraged that such reprehensible research could have occurred under the guise of public health .
we deeply regret that it happened , and we apologize to all the individuals who were affected by such abhorrent research practices . "
the experiments were led by physician john charles cutler .
first called grande verole or the “ great pox ” by the french .
other historical names have included " button scurvy " , sibbens , frenga , and dichuchwa among others .
