the serengeti hosts the second largest terrestrial mammal migration in the world .
serengeti is also renowned for its large lion population .
most of the serengeti was known to outsiders as maasailand .
they are known as fierce warriors .
historically , their strength and reputation kept the newly arrived europeans from exploiting the animals and resources of most of their land .
a rinderpest epidemic and drought in the 1890s greatly reduced the numbers of both maasai and animal populations .
poaching and the absence of fires , which had been the result of human activity , set the stage for the development of dense woodlands and thickets over the next 50 years .
by the mid-1970s wildebeest and the cape buffalo populations had recovered and were increasingly cropping the grass .
in the 21st century , mass rabies vaccination programmes for domestic dogs in the serengeti have not only indirectly prevented hundreds of human deaths , but also protected wildlife species such as the endangered african wild dog .
each year around the same time , the circular great wildebeest migration begins in the ngorongoro conservation area of the southern serengeti in tanzania .
this migration is a natural phenomenon determined by the availability of grazing .
the initial phase lasts from about january to march .
during february , the wildebeest spend their time on the short grass plains of the southeastern part of the ecosystem , grazing and giving birth to approximately 500,000 calves within a 2 to 3 week period .
few calves are born ahead of time .
the reason for this is that very young calves are more noticeable to predators when mixed with older calves from the previous year .
as the rains end in may , the animals start moving northwest into the areas around the grumeti river , where they usually stay until late june .
the crossings of the grumeti and mara rivers beginning in july are a popular safari attraction .
the herds arrive in kenya in late july / august .
in early november , with the start of the short rains , the migration starts moving south again , to the short grass plains of the southeast .
besides being known for the great migration , the serengeti is also famous for its large predators .
wild dogs are scarce in much of the serengeti .
lions and spotted hyenas , predators that steal wild dog kills and are a direct cause of wild dog mortality , are abundant .
the serengeti can support this remarkable variety of grazers .
tanzania and kenya have many protected areas , including national parks , conservation areas , and game reserves .
the southeastern part of the region is in the rain shadow of the ngorongoro conservation area 's highlands .
a gradient of soil depth is northwestward across the plains .
about 70 km west , the state of victoria and the loita plains are at the point of the maasai mara national reserve .
in the far northwest , acacia woodlands are replaced by broadleaved terminalia-combretum woodlands , caused by a change in geology .
altitudes in the serengeti range from 920 to 9000 .
the highlands are considerably cooler than the plains and are covered by montane forests .
the conservation area is also home to the ngorongoro crater and the olduvai gorge .
