woodstock was a music festival that was held in 1969 at max yasgur 's 600 acre dairy farm in bethel , new york .
it was called " an aquarian exposition : 3 days of peace & music " .
it was also called the bethel rock festival or the aquarian music festival .
thirty-two acts performed outdoors .
the festival has become widely regarded as a key moment in popular music history , as well as a defining event for the " counterculture generation " .
joni mitchell 's song " stills , nash & young " became major hits for crosby , stills , nash & young and matthews southern comfort .
music events with the woodstock name have been planned for anniversaries including the tenth , twentieth , twenty-fifth , thirtieth , fortieth , and fiftieth .
in 2004 , " rolling stone " magazine listed it as number 19 of the " 50 moments that changed the history of rock and roll " .
in 2017 , the festival site was listed on the national register of historic places .
woodstock was started by michael lang , artie kornfeld , joel rosenman , and john roberts .
roberts and rosenman paid for the project .
lang had some experience as a promoter , having co-organized the miami pop festival on the east coast the prior year , where an estimated 25,000 people attended the two-day event .
roberts and rosenman were the people who made a lot of money in new york city in the early 1960s .
lang and kornfeld 's lawyer , miles lourie , who had done legal work on the media sound project , suggested that they contact roberts and rosenman about financing a similar , but much smaller , studio kornfeld and lang wanted to build in woodstock , new york .
roberts and rosenman counter-proposed a concert featuring the kind of artists known to frequent the woodstock area .
kornfeld and lang agreed to the new plan , and woodstock ventures was formed in january 1969 .
the company offices were in an oddly decorated floor of 47 west 57th street in manhattan .
burt cohen , and his design group , curtain call productions , oversaw the psychedelic transformation of the office .
from the start , there were differences in approach among the four : roberts was disciplined and knew what was needed for the venture to succeed , while the laid-back lang lang lang saw woodstock as a new , " relaxed " way of bringing entrepreneurs together .
when lang was unable to find a place for the concert , roberts and rosenman took to the road and eventually came up with a venue .
similar differences about financial discipline made roberts and rosenman wonder whether to pull the plug or to continue pumping money into the project .
in april 1969 , the creedence clearwater revival became the first act to sign a contract for the event .
the promoters had experienced difficulty landing big-name groups before creedence committing to play .
creedence drummer doug clifford later said , " once creedence signed , everyone else jumped in line and all the other big acts came on . "
given their 3 a . m . start time and omission from the " woodstock " movie depicting creedence frontman john fogerty 's insistenceeux , creedence members have expressed bitterness over their experiences regarding the festival .
woodstock was designed as a profit-making venture .
it became a “ free concert ” only after the event drew hundreds of thousands more people than the organizers had prepared for .
tickets for the three-day event cost $ 18 in advance and $ 24 at the gate extending as much as $ 22 .
ticket sales were limited to record stores in the greater new york city area , or by mail via a post office box at the radio city station post office in midtown manhattan .
around 186,000 advance tickets were sold .
the original venue plan was for the festival to take place in wallkill , new york .
after local residents quickly shot down that idea , lang and kornfeld thought they had found another possible location in saugerties , new york .
but they had misunderstood , as the landowner 's attorney made clear , in a brief meeting with roberts and rosenman .
they found the 300 acre mills industrial park in the town of wallkill , new york .
town officials promised that no more than 50,000 would attend the town .
town residents immediately opposed the project .
in early july , the town board passed a law that required a permit to be allowed to meet over 5,000 people .
on july 15,1969 , the wallkill zoning board of appeals officially banned the concert .
the ban , however , turned out to be a publicity bonanza for the festival .
in 2007 , elliot tiber wrote about the event on his 15 acre motel grounds , and had a permit for such an event .
he said that he was the reason for dairy farmer max yasgur .
tiber was a real farmer who drove him to a farm without tiber .
sam yasgur agrees with max 's son .
yasgur 's land formed a natural bowl sloping down to filippini pond on the land 's north side .
the stage would be set up at the bottom of the hill with filippini pond forming a backdrop .
the pond would become a popular skinny dipping destination .
the organizers once again told bethel authorities that they expected no more than 50,000 people .
despite resident opposition and signs proclaiming , " buy no milk .
the bethel town board refused to issue the permits formally .
clark was ordered to stop work orders .
on august 2,1969 , the building inspector informed woodstock ventures , inc . that the stop work order was lifted , and the festival could proceed pending backing by the department of health and agriculture , and removal of all structures by september 1,1969 .
the change in venue did not give the festival organizers enough time to prepare .
at a meeting three days before the event , organizers felt they had two options : one was to complete the fencing and ticket booths , without which the promoters would lose any profit or go into debt .
when the audience arrived by the tens of thousands the next day , the wednesday before the weekend , the decision was made for them .
those without tickets simply walked through gaps in the fences , and the organizers were forced to make the event free of charge .
the festival was nearly bankrupt , but the film and recording rights were paid more than paid for the losses after the release of the movie " woodstock " in march 1970 .
the influx of attenders to the rural concert site in bethel created a massive traffic jam .
the town of bethel did not enforce its codes .
eventually , radio and television descriptions of the traffic jams discouraged people from setting off to the festival .
