emperor bidatsuvius -lrb- [unk] 天 皇 , bidatsu-tenno , 538 – 585 bc -rrb- was the 30th emperor of japan , according to the traditional order of succession .
the years of reign of bidatsu start in 572 and end in 585 .
the list of early emperors were not confirmed as " traditional " until the reign of emperor kammu , who was the 50th monarch of the yamato dynasty .
historians consider details about the life of emperor bidatsu to be possibly legendary , but probable .
the name " bidatsu "-tenno " was created for him posthumously by later generations .
in the " nihon shoki " , he is called nunakura no futotamashikiuraluralized [unk] 中 [unk] 太 [unk] [unk] [unk] 太 .
osada no miya of iware was the palace in yamato province .
in the 15th year of kimmei 's reign , bidatsu was named crown prince .
in the 32nd year of kimmei 's reign , his reign lasted 572 年 , 572dilly , and the succession was received by his second son .
soon after , emperor bidatsu became king .
bidatsu 's contemporary title would not have been " tenno " .
rather , it was presumably " sumeramikoto " or " amenoshita shiroshimesu okimi " 治 天 下 大 王 ¥ , meaning " the great king who rules all under heaven " .
alternatively , bidatsu might have been referred to as [unk] 大 王 / 大 [unk] or the " great king of yamato " .
bidatsu 's reign marked by power struggles about buddhism .
the two most important men in the court of bidatsu were soga no umako and mononobe no moriya .
soga supported the growth of buddhism , and moriya wanted to stop it .
according to " nihon shoki " , his court successfully established relations with baekje and silla , two of the three kingdoms of korea .
the emperor died from a disease which afflicted him with sores .
the actual site of his grave is known .
the emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial shinto shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine osaka .
the imperial household agency designates this location as bidatsu 's mausoleum .
it is formally named " kawachi no shinaga no naka no misasagi " .
he was the second son of emperor kimmei .
his mother was a daughter of emperor senka .
although he had many children , none of them would ever become emperor .
according to " gukansho " , bidatsu had four empresses and 16 imperial children isabelle 6 sons and 10 daughters respectively .
bidatsu 's first empress , hirohime , died in the fifth year of his reign .
to replace her , he elevated one of his consorts , princess nukatabe , to the rank of empress .
nukatabe was his half-sister .
later she became the king in her own right .
he was succeeded by one of his brothers , emperor yomei .
