In mathematics, the Riemann zeta function is an important function in number theory.
It is related to the distribution of prime numbers.
It also has uses in other areas such as physics, probability theory, and applied statistics.
It is named after the German mathematician Bernhard Riemann, who wrote about it in the memoir "", published in 1859.
The Riemann hypothesis is a conjecture about the distribution of the zeros of the Riemann zeta function.
Many mathematicians consider the Riemann hypothesis to be the most important unsolved problem in pure mathematics.
When using mathematical symbols to describe the Riemann zeta function, it is represented as an infinite series: where formula_2 is the real part of the complex number formula_3.
For example, if formula_4, then formula_5 (where formula_6).
This makes a sequence.
The first few terms of this sequence would be,
However, this doesn't apply for numbers where formula_8.
This is because, if we interpret this function as an infinite sum, the sum does not converge, it instead diverges.
This means that instead of nearing a specific value, it will get infinitely large.
Riemann used analytic continuation, so that he could give a value to all numbers except 1.
formula_9 represents the harmonic series, which diverges, meaning that the sum does not near any specific number.
Leonhard Euler discovered the first results about the series that this function represents in the eighteenth century.
He proved that the Zeta function can be written as an infinite product of prime numbers.
This is an infinite product.
formula_11 means that only prime numbers are included in the product.
Mathematicians are interested in those values of formula_3 for which the function is equal to zero.
The Riemann hypothesis conjectures that all the "non-trivial zeros" have a real part one half (meaning for a complex number in the form formula_4), all the non-trivial zeros are guessed to be of the form formula_15 for some value "k".
Because all of the non-trivial zeros are guessed to have a real part of 1/2, this region is called the "critical strip".
So far, all of the computed nontrivial zeros are on this line.
Proving or disproving the hypothesis has been very difficult, and is still troubling mathematicians to this day.