he was the first great italian painter of the quattrocento period of the italian renaissance .
vasari said that masaccio was the best painter of his generation because of his skill at imitating nature , recreating lifelike figures and movements as well as a convincing sense of three-dimensionality .
he employed nudes and foreshortenings in his figures .
this had not been done before him .
the name masaccio is a humorous version of maso yoko ono .
the name may have been created to distinguish him from his main collaborator , also called maso .
he is considered to have started the early italian renaissance in painting with his works in the mid-and late-1420s .
he was one of the first to use linear perspective in his painting .
he moved away from the international gothic style .
masaccio died at the age of twenty-six .
filippo brunelleschi said : " we have suffered a great loss . "
masaccio was born in the province of arezzo , tuscany .
his father was a notary .
his family name , cassai , comes from the trade of his grandfather simone and granduncle lorenzo , who were carpenters / cabinet makers ashore " casse " , hence " cassai " .
his father died in 1406 , when he was only five .
he also was to become a painter .
in 1412 , monna jacopa married an old apothecary , tedesco di maestro feo .
the renaissance painters traditionally began an apprenticeship with an established master around the age of 12 .
he was not known in the city until he joined the painters guildship of arte de ' medici e speziali gibbons as an independent master on january 7,1422 .
the first works attributed to masaccio are the san giovenale triptychcinocinocino museum , now in the museum of cascia di reggello near florence , and the " virgin and child with saint anne " [mask] sant ' anna metterzatlaneux at the uffizi .
the san giovenale altarpiece was found in 1961 in the church of san giovenale at cascia di reggello , very close to masaccio 's hometown .
it depicts the virgin and child with angels in the central panel , sts .
bartholomew and blaise were on the left panel , and sts .
juvenalnier i . e . san giovenalerford and anthony abbot in the right panel .
the painting has lost much of its original framing , and its surface is badly covered .
nevertheless , masaccio 's concern to suggest three-dimensionality through volumetric figures and foreshortened forms is apparent .
the second work was perhaps masaccio 's first collaboration with the older and already-renowned artist , masolino da panicale 1383 / 4-c . 1436 c1 .
the differences of the two artists ' collaboration are unknown .
masolino is believed to have painted the figure of st . anne and the angels that hold the cloth of honor behind her .
masolino 's figures are delicate , graceful and somewhat flat , while masaccio 's are solid and hefty .
in florence , masaccio could study the works of giotto .
in 1423 , when masaccio travelled to rome with masolino , he was freed of all gothic and byzantine influence .
the traces of influences from ancient roman and greek art that are present in some of masaccio 's works presumably originated from this trip .
it was destroyed when the church was rebuilt in the 16th century .
in 1424 , the " duo preciso e noto " premiered a well and known duo " rbis of masaccio and masolino " .
it was completed by filippino lippi in the 1480s .
the iconography of the fresco is somewhat unusual .
as a whole , the frescoes tell the life of st peter as if it was the story of salvation .
the style of masaccio 's scenes shows the influence of giotto .
figures are large , heavy , and solid .
unlike giotto , however , masaccio uses linear and atmospheric perspective , directional light , and chiaroscuro , which is the representation of form through light and color without outlines .
as a result , his frescoes are even more convincingly lifelike than those of his trecento .
the expulsion from the garden of eden shows adam and eve , chased from the garden by a threatening angel .
adam covers his entire face .
the fresco was very important in the work of michelangelo .
another major work is " the tribute money " in which jesus and the apostles are shown as neo-classical archetypes .
scholars have often noted that the shadows of the figures fall away from the chapel window , as if the figures are lit by it .
in the " resurrection of the son of theophilus " , he painted a pavement in perspective , framed by large buildings to obtain a three-dimensional space in which the figures are placed proportionate to their surroundings .
in this he was a pioneer in applying the newly discovered rules of perspective .
on september 1425 masolino left the work and went to hungary .
it is not known if this was because of money quarrels with felice or an artistic divergence with masaccio .
it has also been thought that masolino planned this trip from the very beginning , and needed a close collaborator who could continue the work after his departure .
but he left the frescoes unfinished in 1426 .
however , it has also been suggested that the declining finances of felice brancacci were not enough to pay for any further work , so the painter sought work elsewhere .
masaccio returned in 1427 to work again in the carmine , beginning the " resurrection of the son of theophilus " .
the painting was either restored or completed more than fifty years later .
some of the scenes completed by masaccio and masolino were lost in a fire in 1771 ; we know about them only through vasari 's biography .
the remaining parts were blackened by smoke .
in the twentieth century , the removal of marble slabs covering two areas of the paintings showed the original appearance of the work .
in 1426 , he was asked by giuliano di colino degli scarsi da san giusto to paint a big altarpiece for the church of santa maria del carmine in pisa .
only eleven of about twenty original panels have been rediscovered in various collections around the world .
the central panel of the altarpiece showed the madonna and child is now in the national gallery , london .
the work features a sculptural and human madonna as well as a convincing perspectival depiction of her throne .
he worked on the chapel of the brancacci .
in these years , donatello was also working in pisa at a statue of cardinal rinaldo brancacci , to be sent to naples .
it is suggested that masaccio 's first ventures in plasticity and perspective were based on donatello 's sculpture , before he could study brunelleschi 's more scientific approach to perspective .
around 1427 , masaccio got a job to produce a " holy trinity " for the dominican church in florence .
no contemporary documents say the patron of the fresco , but recently references to ownership of a tomb at the foot of the fresco have been found in the records of the berti family of the santa maria novella quarter of florence .
probably it is the male patron who is represented to the left of the virgin in the painting , while his wife is right of st . john the evangelist .
the fresco is considered by many to be masaccio 's master work .
the reconstruction of masaccio started by making a rough drawing of the composition and perspective lines on the wall .
the drawing was covered with fresh plaster for making the fresco .
to make sure the way the painting was moved , masaccio inserted a nail in at the vanishing point under the base of the cross and attached strings to it , which he pressed in samples or carved into plaster .
the marks of the preparatory works are still visible .
the sacred figures and the donors are shown above an image of a skeleton lying on a sarcophagus .
an inscription seemingly carved into the wall above the skeleton reads : " io fui gia quel che voi siete e quel ch ' io sono voi anco sarete "
this skeleton is at once a reference to adam , whose sin brought humans to death and a reminder to viewers that their time on earth is transitory .
it is only through faith in the trinity .
the holy spirit is seen in the form of a dove above jesus .
the combination of trinity , death and decay can be seen as a transposition of the golgotha chapel in the church of the holy sepulchre in jerusalem .
masaccio produced two other works , a " nativity " and an " annunciation " , now lost , before leaving for rome , where his companion masolino was frescoed with scenes from the life of st . catherine in the basilica di san clemente .
it has never been confirmed that masaccio worked together on that work .
he died in 1428 .
according to legend , he was poisoned by a jealous rival painter .
only four frescoes are from masaccio 's hand .
others are believed to have been destroyed .
masaccio profoundly influenced the art of painting .
vasari wrote that all the most celebrated sculptors and painters studied his frescoes in order to " learn the precepts and rules for painting well " .
he transformed the direction of italian painting , moving it away from the idealizations of gothic art , and , for the first time , presenting it as part of a more profound , natural , and humanist world .
masaccio influenced many artists both while he was alive and posthumously .
his work is particularly notable in the works of florentine minor masters such as andrea di giusto , giovanni dal ponte , and others who attempted to replicate his glowing , lifelike forms .
