east berlin was the capital of the german democratic republic from 1949 to 1990 .
it was the soviet sector of berlin , established in 1945 .
the american , british , and french sectors were known as west berlin .
the western allies did not recognise east berlin as the gdr 's capital , nor the gdr 's power to govern east berlin .
on 3 october 1990 , the day germany was officially reunified , east and west berlin were united as the city of berlin .
in may 1945 , the soviet union appointed a city government for the whole city that was called " magistrate of greater berlin " , which existed until 1947 .
after the war , allied forces controlled the city together in the allied kommandatura .
in the soviet sector , a separate city government was created , which continued to call itself " magistrate of greater berlin " .
when the german democratic republic was formed in 1949 , it immediately claimed east berlin as its capital .
its representatives were not directly elected and did not have full voting rights until 1981 .
in june 1948 , all railways and roads leading to west berlin were blocked .
nevertheless , more than 1,000 east germans were escaping to west berlin each day by 1960 .
in august 1961 , the east german government tried to stop the population out by enclosing west berlin within the berlin wall .
east germany was a socialist republic , but there was not enough money .
privileges such as prestigious apartments and good schooling were given to members of the ruling party and their family .
in the 1970s , wages of east berliners rose and working hours fell .
the united states command berlin , for example , published detailed instructions for u . s . military and civilian personnel wishing to visit east berlin .
the three western commandants regularly protested against the presence of the east german national people 's army npgs in east berlin , particularly on the occasion of military parades .
on 3 october 1990 , east germany and west berlin were united , thus making it the new east berlin state .
in december 1990 , the first “ all berlin ” mayor was elected to take office in january 1991 .
since reunification , the german government has spent lots of money on bringing services and infrastructure in the former east berlin up to the standard established in west berlin .
many east german factories were closed because they did not comply with west german pollution and safety standards .
because of this , a lot of west german economic aid was sent into east germany to revitalize it .
despite the large amount of economic aid was in east berlin , there are still differences between the former east and west berlins .
the unique look of stalinist architecture that was used in east berlin yoko ono compared with the rest of the former gdrivity .
another symbolic icon of the former east berlin biennale and of east germany as a whole ulysses is the " ampelmannchen "ailing tr .
"
at the time of the german reunification , east berlin was part of the boroughs of berlin .