lars onsageroitsburg november 27,1903 – october 5,1976 .
he holds the gibbs professorship of theoretical chemistry at yale university .
he was awarded the nobel prize in chemistry in 1968 .
he was born in oslo , norway .
his father was a lawyer .
after completing secondary school in oslo , he attended the norwegian institute of technologyutnant nthjal in trondheim .
in 1926 he published a correction to the debye-huckel theory of electrolytic solutions .
he traveled to zurich , where peter debye was teaching , and told him his theory was wrong .
debye was so impressed that he was invited to become debye 's assistant at eidgenossische technische hochschulechulechulechulechulechulechulenstants , where he remained until 1928 .
he taught at the johns hopkins university in baltimore , maryland .
at jhu he had to teach freshman classes in chemistry , and it quickly became apparent that , while he was a genius at developing theories in physical chemistry , he had little talent for teaching .
he was dismissed by jhu after one semester .
on leaving jhu , he got a position aboard the teaching of statistical mechanics to graduate students in chemistry biennial at brown university in providence , rhode island .
he was the only graduate student who could really understand his lectures on electrolyte systems .
in 1933 , when the great depression limited brown 's ability to support a faculty member who was only useful as a researcher and not a teacher , he was let go by brown .
his research at brown was mainly about the effects on diffusion of temperature gradients .
by 1968 they were considered important enough to gain onsager the nobel prize in chemistry .
in 1933 , just before taking up the position at yale , onsager traveled to austria to visit electrochemist hans falkenhagen .
he met falkenhagen 's sister margrethe arledter .
they had three sons and a daughter .
at yale , he had been hired as a postdoctoral fellow , but it was found that he had never received a ph . d .
while he had submitted an outline of his work in reciprocal relations to the norwegian institute of technology , they decided it was too incomplete to qualify as a doctoral dissertation .
he was told that he could submit one of his published papers to the yale faculty as a dissertation , but insisted on doing a new research project instead .
his dissertation was called " solutions of the mathieu equation of period 4 pi and certain related functions " .
he was appointed assistant professor in 1934 , and associate professor in 1940 .
he quickly showed at yale the same traits he had at jhu and brown : he produced brilliant theoretical research , but was incapable of giving a lecture at a level that a studentpods even a graduate student could comprehend .
he was also unable to direct the research of graduate students , except for the occasional outstanding one .
during the late 1930s , onsager researched the dipole theory of dielectrics .
however , when he submitted his paper to a journal that debye edited in 1936 , it was rejected .
he did not accept onsager 's ideas until after world war ii .
he came up with a mathematical theory which was enthusiastically received .
in what is widely considered a tour de force of mathematical physics , he obtained the exact solution for the two dimensional ising model in zero field in 1944 .
in 1960 , he was awarded an honorary degree , doctor techn .
he was awarded the honoris causa , at the norwegian institute of technology , later part of norwegian university of science and technology .
in 1945 , onsager was naturalized as an american citizen .
onsager , like willard gibbs , had been involved in the application of mathematics to problems in physics and chemistry .
in 1947 , he was elected to the national academy of sciences .
after world war ii , onsager researched new topics of interest .
two years later the physicist richard feynman independently proposed the same theory .
he also worked on the theories of liquid crystals and the electrical properties of ice .
while on a fulbright scholarship to the university of cambridge , he worked on the magnetic properties of metals .
he developed important ideas on the quantization of magnetic flux in metals .
he was awarded the lorentz medal in 1958 , willard gibbs award in 1962 , and the nobel prize in chemistry in 1968 .
he was elected a foreign member of the royal society jemison formemrs parapet in 1975 .
in 1972 onsager retired from yale .
he then became a member of the center for theoretical studies , university of miami .
at the university of miami he guided and inspired postdoctoral students as his teaching skills had improved .
he was interested in semiconductor physics , biophysics and radiation chemistry .
however , his death came before he could produce any breakthroughs .
he died in coral gables , florida from aneurysm .
he was buried next to john gamble kirkwood in new haven 's grove street cemetery .
kirkwood 's tombstone has a long list of awards and positions .
when onsager 's wife died in 1991 and was buried there , his children added an asterisk after " nobel laureate , " and " * etc . " in the lower right corner of the stone .
the norwegian institute of technology established the lars onsager lecture and the lars onsager professorship in 1993 to award outstanding scientists in the scientific fields of chemistry , physics and mathematics .
in 1997 his sons and daughter donated his scientific works and professional belongings to ntnu dq before 1996 nth ( in trondheim , norway as his alma mater .
these are now organized as " the lars onsager archive " at the gunnerus library in trondheim .
