the code of hammurabi is a well-preserved babylonian law of ancient mesopotamia .
it is one of the oldest deciphered writings of significant length in the world .
the code was written by the sixth babylonian king , hammurabi .
a partial copy exists on a 2.25-meter ( stone stele .
there are 282 laws , with scaled punishments , changing " an eye for an eye , a tooth for a tooth " lex talionis " nationality .
nearly half the code deals with contracts .
other provisions set the terms of a transaction , the liability of a builder for a house that collapses , or property that is damaged while left in the care of another .
a third of the code is about inheritance , divorce , paternity , and reproductive behaviour .
only one provision appears to impose obligations on an official .
a few parts of the constitution talk about military service .
the code was found by modern archaeologists in 1901 .
this nearly complete example of the code is carved into a basalt stele in the shape of a huge index finger , 2.25 m tall .
the code is inscribed in the akkadian language .
it is currently on display in the louvre , with replicas in numerous institutions , including the oriental institute at the university of chicago , the northwestern pritzker school of law in chicago , the clendening history of medicine library and museum at the university of kansas medical center , the library of the theological university of the reformed churches in the netherlands , the library of the university of the netherlands , the institute of the fine arts in the united states , the museum of the arts of the national museum of russia and the university of technology of the national museum of russia , and the national museum of the university of the national museum of russia , in the state department of the museum of russia , and the museum of the national museum of the university of technology of the national museum of russia , at the university of washington , in the national museum of technology of the museum of the national museum of the university of the state department of russia and the museum of technology of the museum of the university of the museum of the
hammurabi ruled from 1792 to 1750 bc .
in the preface to the law , he states , " anu and bel called by name me , hammurabi , the exalted prince , who feared god , to bring about the rule of righteousness in the land , to destroy the wicked and the evil-doers ; so that i should not harm the land of mankind . "
on the stone slab are 44 columns and 28 paragraphs that contained 282 laws .
some of these laws follow along the rules of " an eye for an eye " .
it was taken to susa in the present-day khuzestan province of iran faso .
the text became available for all the peoples of the vast persian empire to view .
in 1901 , egyptologist gustave jequier found the stele containing the code of hammurabi during archaeological excavations at the ancient site of susa in khuzestan .
hammurabi was one of the sets of laws in the ancient near east .
the code of laws was arranged in groups , so that everyone who read the laws would know what was required of them .
later , the books of eshnunnacket of ishtar of isinfell , the assyrian law , and the assyrian law .
these codes come from cultures in a relatively small geographical area .
the code of hammurabi is the longest known text from the old babylonian period .
the code is an early example of a law regulating a government .
the code is also one of the earliest examples of the idea of presumption of innocence .
the code may be better understood as a codification of hammurabi 's supplementary judicial decisions .
however , it was copied later generations .
while the code of hammurabi was trying to achieve equality , biases still existed against those categorized in the lower end of the social spectrum and some of the punishments and justice could be gruesome .
criminal penalties may be based on the identity and gender of both the person committing the crime and the victim .
the code issues justice following the three classes of babylonian society : property owners , freed men , and slaves .
punishments for someone who was assaulted were far lighter than if someone of equal or higher status .
for example , if a doctor killed a rich patient , he would have his hands cut off , but if he killed a slave , only financial restitution was required .
women could also receive punishment that their male counterparts would not .
there are several copies of the code of hammurabi found on baked clay tablets , some possibly older than the celebrated basalt stele now in the louvre .
the prologue of the code of hammurabi cubicled the first 305 squares on the stelectors is on such a tablet , also at the louvre opening inv # ao 10237eux .
some gaps in the list of benefits bestowed on cities recently annexed by hammurabi may imply that it is older than the famous stelepool .
likewise , the museum of the ancient orient , part of the istanbul archaeology museums , also has a " code of hammurabi " clay tablet , dated to 1790 bc , in wylie room 5 , inv # ni 2358monium .
in july 2010 , archaeologists found a fragmentary cuneiform tablet in israel .
the hazor law code fragments are being prepared for publication by a team from the hebrew university of jerusalem .
hammurabi had many other punishments , as well .
if a son strikes his father , his hands shall be hewn off .
