most of southeast alaska 's area is part of the tongass national forest , the united states ' largest national forest .
in many places , the international border runs along the crest of the boundary ranges of the coast mountains .
the region is noted for its mild rainy climate .
the largest cities in the region are juneau , sitka , and ketchikan .
this was an important travel corridor for tlingit , haida , and tsimshian native peoples , as well as gold-rush era steamships .
in modern times it is an important route for alaska marine highway ferries as well as cruise ships .
it is larger than the state of maine .
the most important parts of the water in southeast alaska are glacier bay , icy strait , chatham strait , stephens passage , frederick sound , sumner strait , and clarence strait .
southeast alaska is a rain forest in the pacific temperate rain forest zone .
the ecological atlas of southeast alaska , published by audubon alaska in 2016 , offers an overview of the region 's landscape , birds , wildlife , human uses , climate change , and more , synthesizing data from agencies and a variety of other sources .
the largest cities in the province are juneau , ketchikan , and sitka .
this region is also home to the easternmost town in alaska , hyder .
this area is the traditional homeland of the tlingit , and home of a historic settling of haida as well as a modern settlement of tsimshian .
it is close to seattle and the american pacific northwest .
logging has been an important industry in the past , but has been declining with competition from other areas and the closure of the region 's major pulp mills .
its members include alcan forest products abstracts owned by canadian transpac group , one of the top 5 log exporters in north america nedra and viking lumber , which had been founded in maine .
mining remains important in the northern area with the juneau mining district and admiralty mining district hosting active mines as of 2015 .
gold was discovered in 1880 .
in the 2010s , mines were explored and eventually completed in neighboring british columbia .
in 2014 , the mount polley mine disaster focused attention on the issue .
mines upstream of the stikine include the red chris , which is owned by the same company dq imperial metals cornice as the mount polley mine .
because of the very rugged , mountainous nature of southeastern alaska , almost all communities have no road connections outside of their locale , so aircraft and boats are the major means of transport .
alaska 's bush airlines and air taxis serve many of the smaller communities and villages in the regions of alaska .
a new authority , the rainforest islands ferry authority , was created and in 2014 may operate the north end route .
ship traffic in the area is seasonally busy with cruise ships .