southeast alaska is the southeastern portion of the u . s . state of alaska .
most of southeast alaska 's area is part of the tongass national forest , the united states ' largest national forest .
in many places , the international border runs along the crest of the boundary ranges of the coast mountains .
the region is noted for its mild rainy climate .
the largest cities in the region are juneau , sitka , and ketchikan .
southeast alaska is the end of the " inside passage " .
this was an important travel corridor for tlingit , haida , and tsimshian native peoples , as well as gold-rush era steamships .
in modern times it is an important route for alaska marine highway ferries as well as cruise ships .
it has a land area of 35138 mi .
it is larger than the state of maine .
the southeast alaskan coast is the coast of the united states .
the population of southeast was 71,616 in 2010 .
it includes the tongass national forestilde which manages admiralty island national monument and misty fjords national monument .
the largest islands are , chichagof island , admiralty island , baranof island , kupreanof island , prince of wales island and prince of wales island .
the most important parts of the water in southeast alaska are glacier bay , icy strait , chatham strait , stephens passage , frederick sound , sumner strait , and clarence strait .
on august 20,1902 , president theodore roosevelt established the alexander archipelago forest reserve .
southeast alaska is a rain forest in the pacific temperate rain forest zone .
the most common tree species are the spruce and the western hemlock .
wildlife includes brown bears , black bears , endemic alexander archipelago wolf packs , and humpback whales , orcas , five species of salmon , bald eagles , harlequin ducks , scoters , and marbled murrelets .
the ecological atlas of southeast alaska , published by audubon alaska in 2016 , offers an overview of the region 's landscape , birds , wildlife , human uses , climate change , and more , synthesizing data from agencies and a variety of other sources .
the largest cities in the province are juneau , ketchikan , and sitka .
other towns are petersburg , wrangell , angoon , craig , klawock , thorne bay , yakutat , skagway , and gustavus .
there are also many towns and villages with about 100 people .
this region is also home to the easternmost town in alaska , hyder .
this area is the traditional homeland of the tlingit , and home of a historic settling of haida as well as a modern settlement of tsimshian .
it is close to seattle and the american pacific northwest .
major industries in southeast alaska include commercial fishing and tourism amounted primarily the cruise ship industry .
logging has been an important industry in the past , but has been declining with competition from other areas and the closure of the region 's major pulp mills .
its members include alcan forest products abstracts owned by canadian transpac group , one of the top 5 log exporters in north america nedra and viking lumber , which had been founded in maine .
people have argued over whether to expand logging in the federally owned tongass are not uncommon .
mining remains important in the northern area with the juneau mining district and admiralty mining district hosting active mines as of 2015 .
gold was discovered in 1880 .
in the 2010s , mines were explored and eventually completed in neighboring british columbia .
in 2014 , the mount polley mine disaster focused attention on the issue .
the proposed kerr sulphurets mitchell exploration is upstream of the unuk .
mines upstream of the stikine include the red chris , which is owned by the same company dq imperial metals cornice as the mount polley mine .
the border between alaska and british columbia was the subject of the alaska boundary dispute .
this led to alienation of the british from the new nation of canada .
because of the very rugged , mountainous nature of southeastern alaska , almost all communities have no road connections outside of their locale , so aircraft and boats are the major means of transport .
the alaska marine highway passes through this region .
alaska airlines is the largest air carrier in the region .
alaska 's bush airlines and air taxis serve many of the smaller communities and villages in the regions of alaska .
many communities are accessible by air only by floatplane .
it connects skagway , haines , juneau , sitka , petersburg , wrangell , ketchikan and other outlying communities with prince rupert , bc and bellingham , washington .
a new authority , the rainforest islands ferry authority , was created and in 2014 may operate the north end route .
the authority would connect coffman cove with wrangell and petersburg .
small companies like sitka-based allen marine and other independent operators in the lynn canal sometimes offer marine passenger service .
ship traffic in the area is seasonally busy with cruise ships .
