a frisbeetify is a small , smooth , curved , or small object that is usually plastic .
it is used for throwing and catching .
the shape of the disc is an airfoil in the shape of a plane .
spinning it gives a stabilizing gyroscopic force , allowing it to be both aimed and thrown for distance .
a wide range of available have different types of disc versions .
those for disc golf are usually smaller but denser and tailored for particular flight profiles to increase or decrease stability and distance .
the longest recorded disc throw is by david wiggins , jr . with a distance of 1109 feet .
disc dog sports use relatively slow-flying discs .
flying rings are also available .
illuminated discs are made of plastic or cells that are made of chemiluminescent fluid or battery-powered leds for play after dark .
others whistle when they reach a certain velocity in flight .
the term " frisbee " is often used to describe all flying discs , but the company is a registered trademark of the wham-o toy company .
this protection results in sports such as ultimate or disc golf having to use of the word " frisbee " .
humans have been tossing disc-shaped objects since time immemorial .
at first these were found objects such as rocks worn smooth in stream beds .
some were tossed for fun while others were used as weapons such as the discus .
throwing the discus was a throwing event in the olympic games of ancient greece .
later objects such as mats , hats , lids , pie tins , and cake pans were found to be perfect for tossing .
walter frederick morrison and his wife had fun tossing a popcorn can lid lid lid after a thanksgiving day dinner in 1937 .
they soon discovered a market for a light duty flying disc when they were offered 25 cents for a cake pan that they were thrown back and forth on a beach near los angeles , california .
" that got the wheels turning , because you could buy a cake pan for five cents , and if people on the beach were willing to pay a quarter for it , well "
the morrisons continued their business until world war ii .
after the war , morrison sketched a design for an improved flying disc that he called the whirlo-way .
after his famous racehorse , he was the founder of the famous racehorse .
he and business partner warren franscioni began making the first plastic discs in 1948 .
they renamed them the flyin-saucer in the wake of reported unidentified flying object-sightings .
" we worked fairs , demonstrating it , " morrison said the " virginian-pilot " .
the two of them were using wires to make the discs hover , so they developed a sales pitch : " the flyin-saucer is free , but the invisible wire is $ 1 . "
“ that ’ s where we learned we could sell these things , ” he said , because people were enthusiastic about them .
morrison and franscioni stopped their partnership in early 1950 .
he discovered that he could produce his own disc more cheaply , and he designed a new model in 1955 called the pluto platter , the archetype of all modern flying discs .
he sold the rights to wham-o in 1957 .
in 1958 , morrison was awarded u . s . design patent for his product .
in june 1957 , wham-o co-founders richard knerr and arthur " spud " melin gave the name " frisbee " after learning that college students were calling the pluto platter by that name .
the man behind the frisbee 's success , however , was southern californian edward headrick , hired in 1964 as wham-o 's general manager and vice president of marketing .
he redesigned the pluto platter by reworking the mold , mainly to remove the names of the planets , but fortuitously increasing the rim thickness and mass in the process , creating a more controllable disc that could be thrown more accurately .
wham-o changed their marketing strategy to promote frisbee use as a new sport , and sales skyrocketed .
in 1964 , the first model went on sale .
headrick patented its design ; it featured raised ridgesbuck the " rings of headrick " magazine .
he is known as the father of frisbee sports .
roddick began creating north american seriespartisan nas aarhus tournament standards for various sports , such as freestyle , guts , double disc court , and overall events .
later , he developed the sport of disc golf .
when headrick died , he was cremated and his ashes were molded into memorial discs and given to family and close friends and sold to benefit the ed headrick memorial museum .
the world record holder is richard and may braaten .
the record is 122 caught frisbees in a row without a single drop .
it was set in manlius , ny .
the frisbee was added into the toy hall of fame in 1998 .
the ift guts competitions in northern michigan , the canadian open frisbee championships — 1972 foley , toronto , toronto , on , vancouver , bc , the octad aarhus 1974 1974 landings , new jersey , the american flying discworld , and the world frisbee competitions are presented as the earliest disc .
before these tournaments , the frisbee was considered a toy and used for recreation .
double disc court was invented in 1974 by jim palmeri .
each team defends its court .
dogs and their human flying disc throwers compete in events such as distance catching and somewhat choreographed freestyle catching .
this is a sport in which players throw a flying disc at a pole hole .
in 1926 , in bladworth , saskatchewan , canada , ronald gibson and a group of his bladworth elementary school chums played a game using metal lids , they called " tin lid golf . "
in 1976 , the game of disc golf was standardized with targets called " pole holes " invented and developed by wham-o 's ed headrick .
in 1974 freestyle competition was created and introduced by ken westerfield and discrafts jim kenner .
teams of two or three players are judged as they perform a routine that consists of a series of creative throwing and catching techniques set to music .
a half-court disc game came from ultimate , similar to hot box .
the object is to move the disc on the field of play by passing , and score points by throwing the flying disc to a teammate in a small scoring area .
the game of guts was invented by the healy brothers in the 1950s .
two teams of one to five team members stand in parallel lines facing each other across a court and throw flying discs at members of the opposing team .
a patented game scoring points by throwing and deflecting the flying disc and hitting or entering the goal .
the game ends when a team scores 21 points or " chogs " the disc for an instant win .
the most widely played disc game is the late 1960s with joel silver and jared kass .
in the 1970s it became an organized sport .
the object of the game is to advance the disc and score points .
players may not run while holding the disc .
