the longest recorded disc throw is by david wiggins , jr . with a distance of 1109 feet .
the term " frisbee " is often used to describe all flying discs , but the company is a registered trademark of the wham-o toy company .
this protection results in sports such as ultimate or disc golf having to use of the word " frisbee " .
at first these were found objects such as rocks worn smooth in stream beds .
some were tossed for fun while others were used as weapons such as the discus .
throwing the discus was a throwing event in the olympic games of ancient greece .
later objects such as mats , hats , lids , pie tins , and cake pans were found to be perfect for tossing .
walter frederick morrison and his wife had fun tossing a popcorn can lid lid lid after a thanksgiving day dinner in 1937 .
they soon discovered a market for a light duty flying disc when they were offered 25 cents for a cake pan that they were thrown back and forth on a beach near los angeles , california .
"
that got the wheels turning , because you could buy a cake pan for five cents , and if people on the beach were willing to pay a quarter for it , well "
the morrisons continued their business until world war ii .
after the war , morrison sketched a design for an improved flying disc that he called the whirlo-way .
he and business partner warren franscioni began making the first plastic discs in 1948 .
they renamed them the flyin-saucer in the wake of reported unidentified flying object-sightings .
"
the two of them were using wires to make the discs hover , so they developed a sales pitch : " the flyin-saucer is free , but the invisible wire is $ 1 . "
morrison and franscioni stopped their partnership in early 1950 .
he discovered that he could produce his own disc more cheaply , and he designed a new model in 1955 called the pluto platter , the archetype of all modern flying discs .
in june 1957 , wham-o co-founders richard knerr and arthur " spud " melin gave the name " frisbee " after learning that college students were calling the pluto platter by that name .
the man behind the frisbee 's success , however , was southern californian edward headrick , hired in 1964 as wham-o 's general manager and vice president of marketing .
he redesigned the pluto platter by reworking the mold , mainly to remove the names of the planets , but fortuitously increasing the rim thickness and mass in the process , creating a more controllable disc that could be thrown more accurately .
wham-o changed their marketing strategy to promote frisbee use as a new sport , and sales skyrocketed .
headrick patented its design ; it featured raised ridgesbuck the " rings of headrick " magazine .
roddick began creating north american seriespartisan nas aarhus tournament standards for various sports , such as freestyle , guts , double disc court , and overall events .
when headrick died , he was cremated and his ashes were molded into memorial discs and given to family and close friends and sold to benefit the ed headrick memorial museum .
the record is 122 caught frisbees in a row without a single drop .
the frisbee was added into the toy hall of fame in 1998 .
the ift guts competitions in northern michigan , the canadian open frisbee championships — 1972 foley , toronto , toronto , on , vancouver , bc , the octad aarhus 1974 1974 landings , new jersey , the american flying discworld , and the world frisbee competitions are presented as the earliest disc .
in 1926 , in bladworth , saskatchewan , canada , ronald gibson and a group of his bladworth elementary school chums played a game using metal lids , they called " tin lid golf . "
in 1976 , the game of disc golf was standardized with targets called " pole holes " invented and developed by wham-o 's ed headrick .
teams of two or three players are judged as they perform a routine that consists of a series of creative throwing and catching techniques set to music .
the object is to move the disc on the field of play by passing , and score points by throwing the flying disc to a teammate in a small scoring area .
the game of guts was invented by the healy brothers in the 1950s .
two teams of one to five team members stand in parallel lines facing each other across a court and throw flying discs at members of the opposing team .
the game ends when a team scores 21 points or " chogs " the disc for an instant win .
the object of the game is to advance the disc and score points .
players may not run while holding the disc .