crystallography is the study of the arrangement of atoms in solids .
the word " crystallography " is derived from the greek words " crystallon " " " cold drop , frozen drop " " , with its meaning extending to all solids with some degree of transparency , and " graphein " to write " .
in july 2012 , the united nations said that the science of crystallography would be the international year of crystallography .
x-ray crystallography is used to determine the structure of large biomolecules such as proteins .
before the development of x-ray crystallographyraphyraphyraphyraphyraphy , the study of crystals was based on physical measurements of their geometry .
this involves measuring the angles of crystal faces relative to each other .
this physical measurement is done using a goniometer .
the position in 3d space of each crystal face is plotted on a stereographic net such as a wulff net or lambert net .
the pole to each face is plotted on the net .
each point is labelled with its miller index .
the final plot allows the symmetry of the crystal to be established .
crystallography methods now depend on analysis of the diffraction patterns of a sample targeted by a beam of some type .
x-rays are most commonly used .
this is facilitated by the wave properties of the particles .
crystallography is a way to describe the type of beam used .
these three types of radiation interact with the specimen in different ways .
because of these different forms of interaction , the three types of radiation are suitable for different crystallographic studies .
an image of a small object is made using a lens to focus the beam , similar to a lens in a microscope .
however , the wavelength of visible light produces about 4000 to 7000 angstromstrom antennas .
so obtaining information about the spatial arrangement of atoms requires the use of radiation with shorter wavelengths , such as x-ray or neutron beams .
using shorter wavelengths implied abandoning microscopy and true imaging , however , there exists no material from which a lens can be seen .
scientists have had some success with some x-rays with microscopic fresnel zone plates made from gold , and by reflection inside long tapered capillaries .
diffracted x-ray or neutron beams should be focused to produce images , so the sample structure must be reconstructed from the diffraction pattern .
sharp features in the diffraction pattern arise from periodic , repeating structure in the sample .
they are ideal for analyzing the structure of solids .
some materials that have been analyzed , such as proteins , do not occur naturally as crystals .
typically , such molecules are placed in solution and allowed to crystallize through vapor diffusion .
a drop of solution containing the molecule , buffer , and precipitants is sealed in a container with a reservoir containing a hygroscopic solution .
water in the drops drops to the reservoir , slowly increasing the amount of the crystal and allowing a crystal to form .
if the concentration was to rise more quickly , the molecule would simply precipitate out of solution .
once a crystal is obtained , data can be collected using a beam of radiation .
although many universities that engage in crystallography have their own x-ray producing equipment , synchrotrons are often used as x-ray sources , because of the purer and more complete patterns such as streams .
synchrotron sources have a much higher intensity of x-ray beams , so data collection takes a fraction of the time normally necessary at weaker sources .
complementary neutron crystallography techniques are used to identify the positions of hydrogen atoms , since x-rays only interact very weakly with light elements such as hydrogen .
producing an image from a diffraction pattern requires sophisticated mathematics .
the mathematically predicted diffraction patterns of an hypothesized or " model " structure are compared to the actual pattern generated by the crystalline sample .
ideally , researchers make several initial guesses , which by adding different refinement all converge on the same answer .
models are refined until their predicted patterns match to as great a degree as can be achieved without radical revision of the model .
this is a painstaking process , made much easier today by computers .
the mathematical methods for the analysis of diffraction data only apply to " patterns " .
hence crystallography applies only to crystals , or to molecules which can be coaxed to crystallize .
in spite of this , a certain amount of molecular information can be deduced from patterns that are generated by fibers and powders .
this level of order can be sufficient to deduce the structure of simple molecules , or to determine the coarse features of more complicated molecules .
for example , the double helix structure of dna was deduced from an x-ray diffraction pattern that had been generated by a fibrous sample .
crystallography is a tool used in materials science to characterize different materials .
in single crystals , the effects of the crystalline arrangement of atoms is often easy to see macroscopically , because the natural shapes of crystals reflect the atomic structure .
in addition , physical properties are often controlled by crystalline defects .
the understanding of crystal structures is needed to understand crystallographic defects .
mostly , materials do not occur as a single crystal , but in poly-crystalline formocation i . e . , as an aggregate of small crystals with different orientations .
because of this , the powder diffraction method , which takes diffraction patterns of polycrystalline samples with a large number of crystals , plays an important role in structural determination .
other physical properties are linked to crystallography .
for example , the clay in the form of small , flat , platelike structures .
clay can be easily deformed because the platelike particles can slip along each other in the plane of the plates , yet remain strongly connected in the direction perpendicular to the plates .
such mechanisms can be studied by crystallography measurements .
in another example , iron transforms from a body-centered cubic centimetres -lrb- bcc -rrb- structure to a face-centered cubicrled fcc ( structure called austenite when it is heated .
the fcc structure is a close-packed structure unlike the bcc structure .
crystallography is useful in phase identification .
when manufacturing or using a material , it is generally desirable to know what phases are present in the material , as their composition , structure and proportions will influence the material 's properties .
each phase has a characteristic arrangement of atoms .
x-ray diffraction can be used to identify which patterns are present in the material , and thus which compounds are present .
crystallography covers the symmetry patterns which can be formed by atoms in a crystal .
x-ray crystallography is the main method for determining the molecular conformations of biological macromolecules , particularly protein and nucleic acids such as dna and rna .
in fact , the double helix structure of dna was deduced from crystallographic data .
the first crystal structure of a macromolecule was solved in 1958 .
the protein data bankpressant pdb federer is a freely accessible repository for the structures of proteins and other biological macromolecules .
computer programs can be used to make molecular structures easier .
neutron crystallography is often used to help refine structures obtained by x-ray methods or to solve a specific bond .
electron crystallography has been used to determine some protein structures , most notably membrane proteins and viral capsids .
the international tables for crystallography is a series of eight books that outlines the standard notations for formatting , describing and testing crystals .
the series contains books that covers organic structure .
the international tables are focused on procedures , techniques and descriptions and do not list the physical properties of individual crystals themselves .
