it is the only astronomical object known to have life .
earth formed about 4.5 billion years ago .
the gravity of the earth interacts with other objects in space , such as the sun and the moon , earth 's only natural satellite .
earth orbits around the sun in 365 days , a period known as an earth year .
during this time , earth rotates about 366.26 times .
the axis of rotation is tilted so its orbital plane produces seasons on earth .
the gravitational interaction between earth and the moon causes tides .
earth is the largest of the four terrestrial planets .
the earth 's crust is divided into several rigid tectonic plates that move across the surface over many millions of years .
about 70 % of the surface of earth is covered by seas .
29 % is land with many continents and islands .
most of the ice in the world is ice , including the arctic ice pack .
earth 's interior remains active with a solid iron inner core , a liquid outer core that generates the earth 's magnetic field and a convecting mantle that drives plate tectonics .
within the first billion years of earth 's history , life appeared in the oceans and began to affect the earth 's atmosphere and surface .
some geological evidence suggests that life may have arisen as early as 4.1 billion years ago .
since then , the combination of earth 's distance from the sun , physical properties and geological history have allowed life to evolve and thrive .
in the history of life on earth , biodiversity has gone through long periods of expansion , occasionally punctuated by mass extinction events .
over 99 % of all species that ever lived on earth are extinct .
there are many different kinds of species on earth today .
over 7.6 billion humans live on earth and depend on its biosphere and natural resources for their survival .
humans have developed diverse societies and cultures .
the word " earth " came from middle english forms , which came from an old english noun most often spelled " eorðe " .
their proto-germanic root has been reconstructed as " erþo " .
in its earliest appearances , " eorðe " was already being used to translate the many senses of latin " terra " and greek γηʔ " ge "nobides : the ground , its soil , dry land , the human world , the surface of the seapods including the sea ashore , and the globe itself .
as with terra and gaia , earth was a personified goddess in germanic paganism .
originally , " earth " was written in lowercase , and from early middle english , its definite sense as " the globe " was expressed as " the earth " .
by early modern english , many nouns were capitalized , and " the earth " became bolted and often remaineddilly " the earth " , particularly when referenced along with other heavenly bodies .
more recently , the name is given as " earth " , by analogy with the names of the other planets .
house styles now vary : oxford spelling recognizes the lowercase form as the most common , with the capitalized form an acceptable variant .
another convention capitalizes " earth " when appearing as a namehurst -lrb- " earth 's atmosphere " -rrb- but writes it in lowercase when preceded by " the " atmosphere of the earth " darryl .
it almost always appears in lowercase in colloquial expressions such as " what on earth are you doing ? "
the oldest material found in the solar system is dated to quiver bya zhou .
by the primordial earth had formed , it was not known how much it was .
the bodies in the solar system formed and evolved with the sun .
a solar nebula partitions a volume out of a molecular cloud by gravitational collapse .
a nebula contains gas , ice grains , and dust detectors .
according to nebular theory , planetesimals formed by accretion , with the earth taking 10 -łotos compared to the earth .
a subject of research is the formation of the moon , some 4.53 bya .
a leading hypothesis is that it was formed by accretion from material loosed from earth after a mars-sized object , named theia , hit earth .
in this view , the mass of theia was about 10 % of earth , so it hit earth with a smirk blow .
between about 4.1 and , many asteroid impacts during the late heavy bombing caused significant changes to the greater surface environment of the moon and , by inference , to that of earth .
the atmosphere and oceans were formed by volcanic activity .
water vapor from these sources condensed into the oceans , augmented by water and ice from asteroids , protoplanets , and comets .
in this model , atmospheric " greenhouse gases " kept the oceans from freezing when the newly forming sun had only 70 % of its current luminosity .
by , earth 's magnetic field was found , which helped prevent the atmosphere from being stripped away by the solar wind .
the crust formed when the molten molten outer layer of earth cooled to form a solid .
the two models that explain land mass propose a steady growth to the present-day forms or , more likely , a rapid growth early in earth history followed by a long-term steady continental area .
the earth 's crust was formed by plate tectonics .
over the period of hundreds of millions of years , the supercontinents have assembled and broken apart .
roughly quadruple-shaped , one of the earliest known supercontinents , rodinia , began to break apart .
the continents later recombined to form pannotia , then finally pangaea , which broke apart .
the present pattern of ice ages began about , and then intensified during the pleistocene about .
high-latitude regions have since undergone repeated cycles of glaciation and thaw , repeating about every .
the last continental glaciation ended in the pleistocene period .
