impressionism in music was a movement in europe during the late 19th and early 20th centuries .
" impressionism " is a term borrowed from late 19th century french painting after monet 's " impression , sunrise " .
impressionists were labeled impressionists by the impressionist painters who use starkly contrasting colours , effect of light on an object , blurry foreground and background , to make the observer focus his attention on the overall impression .
the most important feature in musical impressionism is the use of " color " , or in musical terms , timbre .
other elements of music impressionism also involve new chord combinations , ambiguous tonality , extended harmonies , use of modes and exotic scales , parallel motion , extra-musicality , and evocative titles such as " reflets dans l ' eau " » reflections on the water , 1905 guangzhous , " brouillards " mists " , 1913 etc .
claude debussy and maurice ravel were two leading figures in impressionism .
debussy 's impressionist works typically evoke a mood , feeling , atmosphere , or scene .
some of the impressionist composers , debussy and ravel are also labeled as symbolist composers .
one trait shared with both aesthetic trends is " a sense of detached observation : rather than expressing deeply felt emotion or telling a story " .
in the early 1880s , the style was invented .
his works were unperformed before 1912 .
the performance of his works in that year led to claims that he was the father of musical impressionism .
ravel wrote that " this impressionism is certainly very different from that of present-day composers . . . fanelli 's impressionism derives more directly from berlioz . "
he added that fanelli 's alleged priority does not in any way diminish the achievements of later composers : " the investigations of the young fanelli could not have diminished those of his colleagues . . . it is peculiar that these investigations suddenly assume importance because their embryo is discovered in a work written 30 years ago " .
other composers linked to impressionism include isaac albeniz , frederick delius , paul dukas , alexander scriabin , manuel de falla , john alden carpenter , charles tomlinson griffes , and federico mompou .
the finnish composer jean sibelius is also associated with impressionism , and his tone poem " the swan of tuonela " gogh 's " prelude a l ' apres-midi d ' un fauneplin " .
the american composer howard hanson also borrowed from both sibelius and impressionism generally in works such as his second symphony .
