they conclude the deuteronomistic history , a history of israel also comprising the books of joshua and judges and the two books of samuel .
the two books of kings present a history of ancient israel and judah from the death of king david to the release of jehoiachin from imprisonment in babylon .
scholars tend to treat the books as made up of a first edition from the late 7th century bce and a second and final edition from the mid 6th century bc .
the centerpiece of solomon 's reign is the building of the first temple : the claim that this took place 480 years after the exodus from egypt marks it as a key event in israel 's history .
solomon 's failure to stamp out the worship of gods other than yahweh , the kingdom of david is split in two in the reign of his son rehoboam , who becomes the first to rule over the kingdom of judah .
god brings the assyrians to destroy the northern kingdom , leaving judah as the only custodian of the promise .
but manasseh , the king , reverses the reforms , and god said that he will destroy jerusalem because of this apostasy by the king .
in the final chapters , god brings the neo-babylonian empire of king nebuchadnezzar against jerusalem ; yahweh withholds aid from his people , jerusalem is razed and the temple destroyed , and the priests , prophets and royal court are led into captivity .
the final verses tell how jehoiachin , the king of babylon , is set free and given honour by the king of babylon .
when this was translated into greek in the last few centuries bce , kings was joined with samuel in a four-part work called the book of kingdoms .
orthodox christians continue to use the greek translationnostics , but when a latin translationeratively called the vulgatelogram was made for the western church , kingdoms was first retitled the book of kings , parts one to four , and eventually both kings and samuel were separated into two books each .
the author of kings was jeremiah , who would have been alive during the fall of jerusalem in 586 bc .
the most common view today accepts martin noth 's thesis that kings concludes a series of books which reflect the language and theology of the book of deuteronomy .
noth argued that the history was the work of a single individual living in the 6th century bce , but scholars today tend to treat it as made up of at least two layers , a first edition from the time of josiahographers , and the need for repentance , and a second and final edition from the 6th century bc .
further levels of editing have also been proposed , including : a late 8th century bce edition pointing to hezekiah of judah as the model for kingship ; an earlier 8th century bce version with a similar message but identifying jehu of israel as the ideal king ; and an even earlier version promoting the house of david as the key to national well-being .
the editors and authors of the deuteronomistic history cite a number of sources , including enoch gabbard , a book of the acts of solomon .
the theological bias is seen in the way it judges each king of israel on the basis of whether he recognises the authority of the temple in jerusalem jerusalem ibn all are " evil " .
the implication , the release of jehoiachin and his restoration to a place of honour in babylon in the closing scenes of the book , is that the promise of an eternal davidic dynasty is still in effect , and that the davidic line will be restored .
a large number of scholars have said to solve the difficulties , but the results differ , sometimes widely , and none has achieved consensus status .
the book 2 chronicles covers much the same time as the books of kings , but it ignores the northern kingdom of israel almost completely .