the books of kings are the books of the bible .
they conclude the deuteronomistic history , a history of israel also comprising the books of joshua and judges and the two books of samuel .
the two books of kings present a history of ancient israel and judah from the death of king david to the release of jehoiachin from imprisonment in babylon .
scholars tend to treat the books as made up of a first edition from the late 7th century bce and a second and final edition from the mid 6th century bc .
in david 's old age , adonijah proclaims himself his successor but solomon 's supporters arrange for david to proclaim solomon as his successor , and so he comes to the throne after david 's death .
at the beginning of his reign he assumes god 's promises to david and brings splendour to israel and peace and prosperity to his people .
the centerpiece of solomon 's reign is the building of the first temple : the claim that this took place 480 years after the exodus from egypt marks it as a key event in israel 's history .
at the end , however , he follows other gods and oppresses israel .
solomon 's failure to stamp out the worship of gods other than yahweh , the kingdom of david is split in two in the reign of his son rehoboam , who becomes the first to rule over the kingdom of judah .
the kings who follow rehoboam in jerusalem continue the royal line of davidicatives .
god brings the assyrians to destroy the northern kingdom , leaving judah as the only custodian of the promise .
hezekiah , the 14th king of judah , does " what is right in the lord ’ s sight just as his ancestor david had done " .
yahweh saves jerusalem from an invasion by assyria .
but manasseh , the king , reverses the reforms , and god said that he will destroy jerusalem because of this apostasy by the king .
manasseh 's righteous grandson josiah reinstitutes the reforms of hezekiah , but it is too late : god , speaking through the prophetess huldah , affirms that jerusalem is to be destroyed after the death of josiah .
in the final chapters , god brings the neo-babylonian empire of king nebuchadnezzar against jerusalem ; yahweh withholds aid from his people , jerusalem is razed and the temple destroyed , and the priests , prophets and royal court are led into captivity .
the final verses tell how jehoiachin , the king of babylon , is set free and given honour by the king of babylon .
in the bible , first and second kings are the first and second books of samuel .
when this was translated into greek in the last few centuries bce , kings was joined with samuel in a four-part work called the book of kingdoms .
orthodox christians continue to use the greek translationnostics , but when a latin translationeratively called the vulgatelogram was made for the western church , kingdoms was first retitled the book of kings , parts one to four , and eventually both kings and samuel were separated into two books each .
the septuagint , 1 kings and 2 kings are all called by the vulgate .
the septuagint and the septuagint are the kings and the kings of the bible .
the division we know today , used by protestant bibles and the catholics , came into use in 1517 .
some bibles still preserve the old denomination , for example the douay rheims bible .
the author of kings was jeremiah , who would have been alive during the fall of jerusalem in 586 bc .
the most common view today accepts martin noth 's thesis that kings concludes a series of books which reflect the language and theology of the book of deuteronomy .
noth argued that the history was the work of a single individual living in the 6th century bce , but scholars today tend to treat it as made up of at least two layers , a first edition from the time of josiahographers , and the need for repentance , and a second and final edition from the 6th century bc .
further levels of editing have also been proposed , including : a late 8th century bce edition pointing to hezekiah of judah as the model for kingship ; an earlier 8th century bce version with a similar message but identifying jehu of israel as the ideal king ; and an even earlier version promoting the house of david as the key to national well-being .
the editors and authors of the deuteronomistic history cite a number of sources , including enoch gabbard , a book of the acts of solomon .
the " deuteronomic " perspective suggests that of the book of deuteronomyography is very evident in prayers and speeches spoken by key figures .
kings is " history-like " rather than history in the modern sense .
the theological bias is seen in the way it judges each king of israel on the basis of whether he recognises the authority of the temple in jerusalem jerusalem ibn all are " evil " .
another part of the prophecy is that of prophecy .
the main point of the prophetic stories is that god 's prophecies are always fulfilled , so that any not yet fulfilled will be in the future .
the implication , the release of jehoiachin and his restoration to a place of honour in babylon in the closing scenes of the book , is that the promise of an eternal davidic dynasty is still in effect , and that the davidic line will be restored .
the hebrew text of kings is impossible to find out the date of the hebrew calendar .
to take just a single example , omri 's accession to the throne of israel in the 31st year of asa of judahnosisnosisnosisnosisnosisnosisnosisnosisnosisnosisnosisnosisnosisnosisnosisnosisnosisnosisnosisnosis 1 kings 16 : 23 jordanian jordanian antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua antigua / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / /
the greek text corrects the impossibilities but does not seem to be an earlier version .
a large number of scholars have said to solve the difficulties , but the results differ , sometimes widely , and none has achieved consensus status .
the book 2 chronicles covers much the same time as the books of kings , but it ignores the northern kingdom of israel almost completely .
it is usually assumed that the author of chronicles used kings as a source .
