a government is a group of people who are in a community .
in the case of its broad associative definition , government normally consists of legislature , executive , and judiciary .
government is a way of making sure that organizational policies are enforced .
each government has a kind of constitution .
the idea of absolute state authority is tyranny nedra .
while all types of government have governance , the word " government " is often used more specifically to refer to the approximately 200 independent national governments on earth , as well as subsidiary organizations .
historically prevalent forms of government include monarchy , aristocracy , timocracy , oligarchy , democracy , theocracy and tyranny .
the two main forms are electoral contest and hereditary succession .
libertarianism is a group of people who try to limit or abolish government .
a government is a group of people who govern a country .
the word " government " comes from the greek verb κυβερναω " kubernao " ⟩ .
the constitution of the united states states states states states , the " columbia encyclopedia " says that government is " a system of social control under which the right to make laws , and the right to enforce them , is vested in a particular group in society . "
while all types of government have governance , the word " government " is often used to refer to the approximately 200 independent national governments on earth , as well as their related organizations .
government is also sometimes used in english as a synonym for governance .
the moment and place that the government developed is lost in time .
about 5,000 years ago , the first small city-states appeared .
by the third to second millennium bc , some of these had developed into larger governed areas : sumer , ancient egypt , the indus valley civilization , and the yellow river civilization .
the development of agriculture and water control projects was a catalyst for the development of governments .
sometimes a chief of a tribe was elected by various rituals or tests of strength to govern his tribe , sometimes with a group of elder tribesmen as a council .
the human ability to precisely communicate abstract , learned information allowed humans to become ever more effective at agriculture , and that allowed for ever increasing population densities .
starting at the end of the 17th century , the number of republican forms of government grew .
the glorious revolution in england , the american revolution , and the french revolution helped the growth of representative forms of government .
the soviet union was the first large country to have a communist government .
since the fall of the berlin wall , liberal democracy has become an even more common form of government .
in the nineteenth and twentieth century , there was a big increase in the size and scale of government at the national level .
this included the regulation of corporations and the development of welfare state .
in political science , it has long been a goal to create a typology or taxonomy of polities , as typologies of political systems are not obvious .
it is especially important in the political science fields of comparative politics and international relations .
the boundaries of government classifications are either fluid or ill-defined .
superficially , all governments have an official or ideal form .
the united states is a constitutional republic .
however , self-identification is not objective .
voltaire argued that " the holy roman empire is neither holy , nor roman , nor an empire " .
identifying a form of government is also difficult because many political systems originate as socio-economic movements and are then carried into governments by parties naming themselves after those movements .
experience with those movements in power , and the strong ties they may have to particular forms of government , can cause them to be considered as forms of government in themselves .
other problems include general non-consensus or " distortion or bias " of reasonable technical definitions to political ideologies and associated forms of governing , due to the nature of politics in the modern era .
for example : the meaning of " conservatism " in the united states has little in common with the way the word 's definition is used elsewhere .
as ribuffo notes , " what americans now call conservatism much of the world calls liberalism or neoliberalism " .
since the 1950s conservatism in the united states has been mainly associated with the republican party .
however , during the era of segregation many southern democrats were conservatives .
there are many different opinions about the different types and properties of governments that exist .
shades of gray are common in government and its corresponding classification .
the most tyrannical dictatorships must organize a broad base of support .
examples include the claims of the united states as being a plutocracy rather than a democracy since some american voters believe elections are being manipulated by rich super pacs .
plato 's greek philosopher plato is a philosopher who studies economic systems .
plato also assigns a man to each of these regimes to illustrate what they stand for .
the tyrannical man would represent tyranny for example .
these five governments progressively degenerate starting with aristocracy at the top and tyranny at the bottom .
one method of classifying governments is by which people have the power to rule .
this can either be one personocks or companies at the same time as a republic representing a country .
an autocracy is a system of government in which supreme power is concentrated in the hands of one person .
aristocracy is a form of government that puts power in the hands of a small , privileged ruling class .
in modern constitutional monarchies the monarch is usually not a king .
the term aristocracy can also refer to the non-peasant , non-servant , and non-city classes in the feudal system .
democracy is a system of government .
in a direct democracy , all citizens are elected directly .
in a representative democracy the citizens elect representatives from among themselves .
representatives meet to form a legislature .
in a constitutional democracy the majority are in the framework of a representative democracy .
a republic is a form of government in which the country is considered a " public matter " polytechnic latin : " res publica " foley , not the property of the rulers , and where offices of states are directly or indirectly elected or appointed rather than inherited .
the people , or some significant portion of them , have supreme control over the government and where offices of state are elected or chosen by elected people .
a republic is a government where the head of state is not a monarch .
montesquieu included both democracies , where all the people have a share in rule , and aristocracies or oligarchies , where only some of the people rule , as republican forms of government .
different countries include democratic republic , parliamentary republic , federal republic , and islamic republic .
a " group " of members are bound together by covenant with a governing head .
the term " federalism " is also used to describe a system of government in which sovereignty is divided between a central government and constituent political units , called states , provinces or otherwise .
the federalism is a system of government that is divided between the national and state governments .
people who support these ideas are called federalists .
historically , political systems originated as socio-economic ideologies .
experience with those movements in power and the strong ties they may have to particular forms of government can cause them to be considered as forms of government in themselves .
certain types are defining of certain types .
this list focuses on different approaches that political systems take to the distribution of sovereignty , and the autonomy of regions within the state .
