the biologist orator f . cook coined the term in 1906 for cladogenesis , the splitting of lineages , as opposed to anagenesis phyletic evolution within lineages .
charles darwin was the first to describe the role of natural selection in speciation in his 1859 book " on the origin of species " .
new species can also be created through hybridisation after hybriding is favored by natural selection , by reproductive isolation .
there are two key issues : :hend 1 — what are the evolutionary mechanisms of speciation , andhend what accounts for the separateness and individuality of species in the biota ?
since charles darwin 's time , efforts to understand the nature of species have focused on the first aspect , and it is now widely agreed that the critical factor behind the origin of new species is reproductive isolation .
in " on the origin of species " , darwin interpreted biological evolution in terms of natural selection , but was perplexed by the clustering of organisms into species .
in discussing these " difficulties " he said : firstly , why , if species have descended from other species by insensibly fine gradations , do we not everywhere see innumerable transitional forms ?
why is not all nature in confusion instead of the species being , as we see them , well defined ? "
this dilemma may be called the absence or rarity of transitional varieties in habitat space .
another dilemma is the absence or rarity of transitional varieties in time .
darwin pointed out that by the theory of natural selection " innumerable transitional forms must have existed , " and wondered " why do we not find them embedded in countless numbers in the crust of the earth . "
that defined species actually do exist in nature in both space and time implies that some basic feature of natural selection operates to generate and maintain species .
it has been argued that the resolution of darwin 's first dilemma is in the fact that out-crossing sexual reproduction has an intrinsic cost of rarity .
if , on a resource gradient , a large number of separate species evolve , each exquisitely adapted to a very narrow band on that gradient , each species will , of necessity , consist of very few members .
finding a mate under these circumstances may present difficulties when many of the individuals in the neighborhood belong to other species .
if any species ’ population size happens , by chance , to increaseinkles at the expense of one or other of its neighboring species , if the environment is saturatedlity , this will make it easier for its members to find sexual partners .
the members of the neighboring species , whose population sizes have decreased , have greater difficulty in finding mates , and form pairs less frequently than the larger species .
this has a snowball effect , with large species growing at the expense of the smaller , rarer species , eventually driving them to extinction .
in most instances , they indicate ahend mutation , which is almost certain to be deleterious .
sexual populations therefore rapidly shed rare or peripheral phenotypic features , thus canalizing the entire external appearance , as illustrated in the illustration of the african pygmy kingfisher , " ispidina picta picta picta picta picta " .
the adult members of a sexual species stimulated the proliferation of field guides on birds , mammals , reptiles , insects , and many other taxa .
once a population has become as similar in appearance as is typical of most species ; its members will avoid mating with members of other populations that look different from themselves .
thus , the avoidance of mates displaying rare and unusual phenotypic features inevitably leads to reproductive isolation .
in the contrasting case of organisms that reproduce asexually , there is no cost of rarity .
all forms of natural speciation have taken place over the course of evolution .
one example of natural speciation is the diversity of the three-spined stickleback , a marine fish that , after the last ice age , has undergone speciation into new freshwater colonies in isolated lakes and streams .
over 10,000 generations , the sticklebacks show structural differences that are greater than those seen between different genera of fish including variations in fins , changes in the number or size of their bony plates , variable jaw structure , and colour differences .
examples include dwarfism and the radical changes among certain famous island chains , for example on komodo .
the gala pagos islands are famous for their influence on charles darwin .
during his five weeks there he heard that galapagos tortoises could be identified by island .
when he returned to england , his speculation on evolution deepened after experts informed him that these were separate species , not just varieties , and famously that other similar galapagos birds were all species of finches .
though the finches were less important for darwin , more recent research has shown the birds now known as darwin 's finches to be a classic case of adaptive evolutionary radiation .
in peripatric speciation , a subform of allopatric speciation , new species are formed in isolated , smaller peripheral populations that are prevented from exchanging genes with the main population .
it is related to the concept of a founder effect , since small populations often undergo bottlenecks .
parapatric speciation is based on continuous variation within a " single " , " connected habitat acting as a source of natural selection rather than the effects of isolation of habitats produced in peripatric and allopatric speciation .
habitat differences may be more important in the development of reproductive isolation than the isolation time .
a niche must be available in order for a new species to be successful .
ring species such as " larus " gulls have been claimed to illustrate speciation in progress , though the situation may be more complex .
sympatric speciation is the formation of two or more descendant species from a single ancestral species all occupying the same geographic location .
in some cases , the term " sympatric " is used for a number of different plants in the same area .
a 2008 study suggests that sympatric speciation has occurred in tennessee cave salamanders .
sympatric speciation driven by ecological factors may also account for the extraordinary diversity of crustaceans living in the depths of siberia 's lake baikal .
this type of speciation would be driven by the conjunction of various advantages of inbreeding such as the expression of advantageous recessive phenotypes , reducing the recombination load , and reducing the cost of sex .
a distinct population emerged in north america in the 19th century some time after apples , a non-native species , were introduced .
hawthorn flies mature later in the season and take longer to mature than apple flies .
it may occur after two populations of the same species are separated and then come back into contact .
if their reproductive isolation is incomplete , then further mating between the populations will produce hybrids , which may or may not be fertile .
if the hybrids are infertile , or fertile but less fit than their ancestors , then there will be further reproductive isolation .
the reasoning behind this is that if the parents of the hybrid offspring each have naturally selected traits for their own certain environments , the hybrid offspring will bear traits from both , therefore would not fit either ecological niche as well as either parent .
this is sometimes called the wallace effect after the evolutionary biologist alfred russel wallace who suggested in the late 19th century that it might be an important factor in speciation .
if the hybrid offspring are more fit than their ancestors , then the populations merge back into the same species within the area they are in contact .
without reinforcement , the geographic area of contact between different forms of the same species will not develop into a boundary between the different species .
natural selection is in the process of speciation .
evidence for the role ecology plays in the process of speciation exists .
it is widely appreciated that sexual selection could drive speciation in many groups , independently of natural selection .
however , the term " speciation " tends to be used in two different , but not mutually exclusive senses .
the first and most commonly used sense refers to the “ birth ” of new species .
that is , the splitting of an existing species into two separate species , or the budding off of a new species from a parent species .
in the second sense , " speciation " refers to the wide-spread tendency of sexual creatures to be grouped into clearly defined species , rather than forming a continuum of phenotypes both in time and space .
this was indeed recognized by darwin as problematic , and included in his " on the origin of species "ractive 1859dilly , under the heading " difficulties with the theory " .
there are several suggestions as to how mate choice might play a significant role in resolving .
new species have been created by animal husbandry , but the dates and methods of the initiation of such species are not clear .
, or domestic sheep that can interbreed with the mouflon .
diane dodd used a laboratory experiment to show how reproductive isolation can develop in " drosophila pseudoobscura " fruit flies after several generations by placing them in different media , starch-based media , starch-based media .
dodd 's experiment has been easy for many others to replicate , including with other kinds of fruit flies and foods .
research in 2005 showed that this rapid evolution of reproductive isolation may in fact be a relic of infection by " wolbachia " bacteria .
alternatively , these observations are consistent with the notion that sexual creatures are inherently reluctant to mate with individuals whose appearance or behavior is different from the norm .
they usually involve the reinforcement process of late stages of speciation .
the order of speciation of three groups from a common ancestor may be unclear or unknown .
it has been suggested that many of the existing plant and most animal species have undergone polyploidization in their evolutionary history .
polyploidy allows reproduction , with the two sets of chromosomes each being able to pair with an identical partner during meiosis .
it is considered very rare but has been shown in " heliconius " butterflies and sunflowers .
theodosius dobzhansky , who studied fruit flies in the early days of genetic research in the 1930s , think that parts of chromosomes that switch from one location to another might cause a species to split into two different species .
he mapped out how it might be possible for sections of chromosomes to move themselves in a genome .
those mobile sections can cause sterility in inter-species hybrids , which can act as a speciation pressure .
in theory , his idea was sound , but scientists long debated whether it actually happened in nature .
however , 2006 research shows that jumping of a gene from one chromosome to another can contribute to the birth of new species .
this validates the reproductive isolation mechanism , a key part of speciation .
some palaeontologists such as niles eldredge and stephen jay gould argued that species usually remain unchanged over long stretches of time , and that speciation occurs only over relatively brief intervals , a view known as " punctuated equilibrium " .
evolution can be extremely rapid , as shown in the creation of domesticated animals and plants in a very short geological space of time , spanning only a few tens of thousands of years .
this raises the question of why the long term rate of evolution is far slower than is possible .
evolution is a process in which species or groups may be changed .
therefore , while a species or group might benefit from being able to adapt to a new environment by accumulating a wide range of genetic variation , this is to the detriment of the " individuals " who have to carry these mutations until a small , unpredictable minority of them ultimately contributes to such an adaptation .
thus , the " capability " to evolve would require group selection , a concept discredited by nedra .
mutations that affect the external appearance of their carriers will then rarely be passed on to the next and later generations .
they are " silent " or " neutral mutations " , and are , used to trace the relatedness and age of populations and species .
this argument implies that evolution can only occur if mutant mates underwent a lot of potential mates .
under these circumstances , not only is the choice of mates severely restricted but population bottlenecks , founder effects , genetic drift and inbreeding cause random changes in the isolated population 's genetic composition .
hybridization with a related species trapped in the same isolate might introduce additional genetic changes .
if an isolated population such as this survives its genetic upheavals , and subsequently expands into a niche in which it has an advantage over its competitors , a new species , or subspecies , will have come in being .
in apparent confirmation of this punctuated equilibrium view of evolution , the fossil record of an evolutionary progression typically consists of species that suddenly appear , and ultimately disappear , hundreds of thousands or millions of years later , without any change in external appearance .