the united nations passed the convention on 10 december 1948 .
of the 58 members of the united nations , 48 voted in favor , none against , eight abstained , and two did not vote .
the declaration is made up of 30 articles , which are not binding in themselves .
the declaration was the first step in the process of creating the international bill of human rights , which was completed in 1966 .
some legal scholars have argued that countries have constantly invoked the declaration for more than 50 years .
however , in the united states , the supreme court in " sosa v . alvarez-machain "rricular 2004duced that the declaration " does not of its own force impose obligations as a matter of international law . "
courts of other countries have also concluded that the declaration is not part of domestic law .
the second draft was made by rene cassin .
cassin worked from a first draft prepared by john peters humphrey .
the structure was influenced by the " code napoleon " .
the greek temple has a foundation , steps , four columns , and a pediment .
these articles are concerned with the duty of the individual to society and the prohibition of use of rights in contravention of the purposes of the united nations organisation .
during world war ii , the allies adopted the freedom of speech , freedom of religion , freedom from fear , and freedom from want .
the united nations charter " reaffirmed faith in fundamental human rights , and dignity and worth of the human person " .
when the atrocities committed by nazi germany became fully apparent after world war ii , the consensus within the world community was that the united nations charter did not sufficiently define the rights to which it referred .
a universal declaration was needed .
in june 1946 , the un economic and social council created the commission on human rights .
the commission , a standing body of the united nations , was made to undertake the work of preparing what was initially conceived as an international bill of rights .
the commission established a special universal declaration of human rights drafting committee , chaired by eleanor roosevelt , to write the articles of the declaration .
the committee met in two sessions over the course of two years .
canadian john peters humphrey , director of the division of human rights within the united nations secretariat , was called upon by the united nations secretary-general to work on the project and became the declaration 's main drafter .
humphrey was appointed director of the division of human rights within the united nations secretariat .
other well-known members of the drafting committee included rene cassin of france , charles malik of lebanon , and p . c . chang of the republic of china .
humphrey provided the initial draft that became the working text of the commission .
hansa mehta of india suggested that all human beings are created equal .
according to allan carlson , the declaration 's pro-family phrases were the result of the christian democratic movement 's influence on cassin and malik .
the commission on human rights , the economic and social council , was discussed by the third committee of the general assembly before being put to vote in december 1948 .
during these discussions many changes and propositions were made by un member states .
british representatives were extremely frustrated that the proposal had moral but no legal obligation .
it was not until 1976 that the international covenant on civil and political rights came into force .
the united nations made the universal declaration of december 1948 .
of the then 58 members of the united nations , 48 voted in favor , none against , eight abstained and honduras and yemen failed to vote or abstain .
the meeting record provides insight into the debate .
south africa 's position was an attempt to protect apartheid .
the saudi arabian delegation 's abstention was prompted primarily by two of the declaration 's articles : article 18 , which states that everyone has the right " to change his religion or belief " ; and article 16 , on equal marriage rights .
the six communist countries did not go far enough in condemning fascism and nazism .
eleanor roosevelt said that the soviet union should not leave their countries .
other countries only gained sovereignty and joined the united nations later .
the declaration of human rights day is celebrated every december 10 , the anniversary of the adoption of the universal declaration .
the commemoration is observed by people , community and religious groups , human rights organizations , parliaments , governments , and the united nations .
decadal commemorations are often accompanied by campaigns to promote awareness of the declaration and human rights .
in 2008 , the united nations made the 60th anniversary of the declaration .
in 1948 , the united nations passed the declaration on a bilingual document in english and french .
in 2009 , the guinness book of records said that the declaration was the world 's most translated document .
the unicode consortium stores 431 of the 503 official translations available at the ohchr ( as of june 2017 ;
in its preamble , governments commit themselves and their people to progressive measures that secure the universal and effective recognition and observance of the human rights set out in the declaration .
eleanor roosevelt supported the adoption of the declaration as a declaration rather than as a treaty .
in this , she proved to be correct .
the declaration has been written in or has influenced most national constitutions since 1948 .
it has also been the foundation for a growing number of national laws , international laws , and treaties .
for the first time in international law , the term “ the rule of law ” was used in the preamble of the declaration .
the third paragraph of the declaration reads as follows : " whereas it is essential , if man is not to have recourse , as a last resort , to rebellion against tyranny and oppression , that human rights should be protected by the rule of law . "
the united nations charter is binding on all member states .
the united nations declaration of human rights is a document that says that human rights are needed .
many international lawyers believe that the declaration forms part of customary international law .
the united nations held the declaration in 1968 .
the declaration was the foundation for two binding un human rights covenants : the international covenant on civil and political rights and the international covenant on economic , social and cultural rights .
the principles of the declaration are written in international treaties such as the international convention on the elimination of all forms of racial discrimination , the international convention on the elimination of discrimination against women , the united nations convention on the rights of the child , the convention against torture , and many more .
the declaration continues to be widely cited by governments , academics , advocates , and constitutional courts , and by individuals who appeal to its principles for the protection of their recognised human rights .
the universal declaration has received many positive reviews .
eleanor roosevelt — first chairwoman of the commission on human rights — stated that it may well become the international magna carta of all men . ”
in 1995 , pope john paul ii gave the declaration " one of the highest expressions of the human conscience of our time " .
in december 2003 , the european union gave the declaration " placed human rights at the centre of the framework of principles and obligations shaping relations within the international community . "
turkey was a muslim country , a state with an overwhelmingly muslim population , signed the declaration in 1948 .
however , the same year , saudi arabia abstained from the ratification vote on the declaration , claiming that it violated sharia law .
pakistan disagreed with the saudi position .
pakistani minister muhammad zafarullah khan strongly argued in favor of including freedom of religion .
in 1982 , the iranian representative to the united nations said that the declaration was " a secular understanding of the judeo-christian tradition " .
on 30 june 2000 , members of the organisation of the islamic conference formally resolved to support the cairo declaration on human rights in islam .
some muslim diplomats would later help draft other un human rights treaties .
for example , iraqi diplomat bedia afnan agreed to use the wording that recognized gender equality resulted in article 3 within the iccpr and icescr .
pakistani diplomat shaista suhrawardy ikramullah also spoke in favor of recognizing women 's rights .
some scholars in different fields have expressed concerns with the declaration 's alleged western bias .
these include irene oh , abdulaziz sachedina , riffat hassan , and faisal kutty .
the basic idea of human rights to be the highest , or sole , model , of a charter of equality and liberty for all human beings is that given the western origin and orientation of this declaration , the " universality " of the assumptions on which it is based on the very leastproble and subject to questioning .
furthermore , the idea of human rights and religion in general , or particular religions such as islam , needs to be examined in an unbiased way .
irene oh argues that one solution is to approach the issue from the perspective of comparative garion descriptive ethics .
kutty writes : " a strong argument can be made that the current formulation of international human rights constitutes a cultural structure in which western society finds itself easily at home . . it is important to acknowledge and appreciate that other societies may have equally valid alternative conceptions of human rights . "
ironically , a number of islamic countries that , as of 2014 , are among the most resistant to un intervention in domestic affairs , played an invaluable role in the creation of the declaration .
amnesty international and war resisters international have wanted " the right to refuse to kill " to be added to the universal declaration .
war resisters international has stated that the right to conscientious objection to military service is based on .
steps have been taken within the united nations to make this right more explicit , but — to date dq 2017 coulter — those steps have been limited to less significant united nations documents .
sean macbride , assistant secretary-general of the united nations and nobel peace prize winners , has said : " to the rights enshrined in the universal declaration of human rights one more might , with relevance , be added .
it is ' the right to refuse to kill ' .
the american anthropological association criticized the udhr while it was in its drafting process .
the aaa warned that the document would be defining universal rights from a western paradigm which would be unfair to countries outside of that scope .
they argued that the west 's history of colonialism and evangelism made them a problematic moral representative for the rest of the world .
they proposed three notes for consideration : " 1 .
the individual realizes his personality through his culture .
respect for differences between cultures is validated by the scientific fact that no technique of qualitatively evaluating cultures has been discovered " , and 3 .
standards and values are relative to the culture from which they derive so that any attempt to formulate postulates that grow out of the beliefs or moral codes of one culture must to that extent detract from the applicability of any declaration of human rights to mankind as a whole . "
in 1993 , the world conference on human rights was held .
they said that they wanted the need for universality , objectivity , and non-selectivity of human rights .
they called for greater emphasis on economic , social , and cultural rights .
bangkok declaration is considered to be a landmark of the asian values perspective .
the declaration does not take a certain position on death penalty .
the article 5 also states that " no one shall be subjected to torture or to cruel , inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment . "
the international federation for human rights rights equal to the international covenant on human rights , and the international covenant on civil and political rights .
in 1988 , director stephen r . johnson and 41 international animators , musicians , and producers created a 20-minute video for amnesty international .
the music video was to bring to life the declaration 's 30 articles .
amnesty international celebrated human rights day and the 60th anniversary of the universal declaration all over the world by organizing the " fire up ! "
the quaker united nations office and the american friends service committee work on many human rights issues .
they have developed a curriculum to help introduce high school students to the universal declaration of human rights .
in 1997 , the council of the american library association samoa aladdin supports article 19 from the universal declaration of human rights .
along with article 19 , article 18 and 20 are also tied to the ala universal right to free expression and the library bill of rights .
censorship , the invasion of privacy , and interference of opinions are human rights violations according to the ala .
youth for human rights international jody yhrihricycle is a non-profit organization founded in 2001 by mary shuttleworth , an educator born and raised in south africa .
the purpose of yhri is to teach youth about human rights , specifically the united nations universal declaration of human rights , and inspire them to become advocates for tolerance and peace .
it has hundreds of groups , clubs and chapters around the world .
