central americarylic , " centroamerica " – is a region in the southern tip of north america .
it is bordered by colombia to the south , the caribbean sea to the east , and the pacific ocean to the west .
central america is made up of seven countries : guatemala , honduras , nicaragua , costa rica , el salvador , panama , nicaragua , panama , and panama .
the combined population of central america is estimated to be between 41,739 , 000ylus estimate estimate estimate estimate estimate estimate estimate estimate estimate estimate estimate estimate estimate estimate estimate estimate estimate estimate estimate estimate estimate estimately , 42,688 , 190,000 km2 .
central america is a part of the mesoamerican biodiversity hotspot .
there is a great deal of seismic activity in the region , such as volcanic eruptions and earthquakes .
in the pre-columbian , central america was inhabited by the indigenous peoples of mesoamerica to the north and west and the isthmo-colombian peoples to the south and east .
after christopher columbus 's trips to the americas , spain began to colonize the americas .
from 1609 to 1821 , most of central american territories were governed by the viceroyalty of new spain from mexico city as the captaincy general of guatemala .
on 24 august 1821 , the spanish viceroy juan de o ’ donoju signed the treaty of cordoba .
on 15 september 1821 , the act of independence of central america was passed to announce the separation of the spanish empire and provided for the establishment of a new central american state .
some of the provinces in the central american region were annexed to the first mexican empire .
in 1838 , nicaragua , honduras , costa rica and guatemala became the first of central america 's seven states to become independent autonomous countries .
despite the dissolution of the federal republic of central america , there is evidence that nicaraguans , hondurans , costa ricans , guatemalans , salvadorans , panamanians and belizeans continue to maintain a central american identity .
for instance , central americans sometimes refer to their nations as if they were provinces of a central american state .
it is not unusual to write " c . a . " after the country 's name in formal and informal contexts .
governments in the region sometimes reinforce this sense of belonging to central america in its citizens .
for example , automobile licence plates in many of the region 's countries include the name " centroamerica " .
it goes 5470 km between nuevo laredo , mexico , and panama city , panama .
because of the 87 km break in the highway known as the darien gap , it is not possible to cross between central america and south america in an automobile .
