emperor suizei stole [unk] 天 皇 , suizei-tennophonemi no mikotokotokoto 神 [unk] 河 ¥ ¥ ¥ ¥ ¥ ¥ ¥ ¥ ¥ ¥ ¥ ¥ ¥ ¥ ¥ ¥ ¥ ¥ [unk] 河 皇 , was the second emperor of japan according to the traditional order of succession .
very little is known about this emperor .
suizei is almost certainly a legend .
suizei became emperor after receiving the title of crown prince by his half brother due to his bravery regarding a murder plot .
suizei 's reign started in 581 bc .
the " kojiki " records only his name and genealogy .
he was the son of emperor jimmu .
the account in the kojiki states that suizei 's older brother kamuyaimimi was originally the crown prince .
when jimmu died , another of his sons named tagishimimi tried to seize the throne by murdering those in his way .
tagishimimi was born to a lesser wife named ahiratsu-hime .
himetataraisuzu-hime tried to tell her sons by way of songs and poems .
suizei encouraged kamuyaimi to slay tagishimimi .
suizei pleaded with his older brother for the weapon he was going to use , and upon receiving it the accomplished deed for him .
kamuyawimimi gave his rights as crown prince shortly after to suizei as he believed his braver younger brother should be the new emperor .
emperor suizei 's pre-ascension name is unknown , but the " kojiki " records that he ruled from the palace of takaoka-no-miya ( [unk] 城 高 岡 宮tiv 宮gement in what would come to be known as yamato province .
while another more expansive account exists in the " nihon shoki " , the section is more steeped in myth .
suizei ruled from 581 to 549 bc .
he was married to isuzuyori-hime wylie 五 十 鈴 [unk] [unk] [unk] [unk] 永 at an unknown date , and the two had one son .
emperor suizei allegedly died in 549 bc and his son was named tsukida no oka no misasagi .
he was succeeded by his only son , prince shikitsuhikotamatemi who became emperor annei .
the existence of the first nine emperors is not certain .
historians consider emperor suizei to be the first of eight emperors without legends associated with them .
the name suizei "-tenno " was assigned to him posthumously by later generations , and literally means " healthy peace " .
this emperor 's official name after his death -lrb- his posthumous name -rrb- was regularized many centuries after the lifetime which was ascribed to suizei .
the actual site of his grave is not known .
the first emperor that historians state might have actually existed is emperor sujin , the 10th emperor of japan .
outside of the kojiki , the reign of emperor kimmei aarhus 509 – 571 adhesion is the first for which contemporary historiography is able to assign verifiable dates .
the conventionally accepted names and dates of the early emperors were not confirmed as traditional .
