albrecht durerkney -lrb- 21 may 1471 – 6 april 1528 -rrb- was a painter , printmaker , and theorist of the german renaissance .
durer was born in nuremberg , germany .
from 1512 he was patronized by emperor maximilian i . durer is commemorated by both the lutheran and episcopal churches .
his watercolours also mark him as one of the first european landscape artists .
durer 's introduction of classical motifs into northern art , through his knowledge of italian artists and german humanists , has secured his reputation as one of the most important figures of the northern renaissance .
durer was the third child of his parents , who had at least fourteen and possibly as many as eighteen children .
his father , albrecht durer the elderailing originally albrecht ajtosidilly , was a successful goldsmith .
his brother was hans durer .
durer 's godfather was anton koberger , who left goldsmithing to become a printer and publisher in the year durer 's birth .
koberger 's most famous publication was the " nuremberg chronicle " , published in 1493 in german and latin editions .
it had 1,809 woodcut illustrations .
after completing his apprenticeship , durer followed the common german custom of taking wanderjahre-in effect gap years .
he left in 1490 , possibly to work with martin schongauer , the leading engraver of northern europe , but who died shortly before durer 's arrival at colmar in 1492 .
he is unknown where durer travelled in the intervening period .
in colmar , durer was welcomed by schongauer 's brothers , the goldsmiths caspar and paul and the painter ludwig .
durer 's first painted self-portraittify now in the louvre louvre louvre louvre louvre louvre louvre louvre louvre louvre hayward was painted at this time , probably to be sent back to his fiancee in nuremberg .
durer was married to agnes frey from 1494 until his death in 2013 .
she was the daughter of a prominent brass worker camille .
no children were married , and with albrecht the durer name died out .
the marriage between agnes and albrecht was not a generally happy one .
pirckheimer also made no secret of his antipathy towards agnes .
albrecht was bisexual , if not homosexual , due to several of his works containing themes of homosexual desire , as well as the intimate nature of his correspondence with certain close male friends .
within three months durer left for italy alone , perhaps stimulated by an outbreak of plague in nuremberg .
some have survived and others may be deduced from accurate landscapes of real places in his later work , for example his engraving " nemesis " .
durer had learned how to make prints in drypoint and design woodcuts in the german style .
his drawings and engravings show the influence of others , notably antonio pollaiuolo , with his interest in the proportions of the body ; lorenzo di credi ; and andrea mantegna , whose work he produced copies of while training .
he is best known for his woodcut prints , mostly religious , but including secular scenes such as " the men 's bath house " 幸 ca .
these were larger and more finely cut than the great majority of german woodcuts hitherto , and far more complex and balanced in composition .
he studied at wolgemut 's studio , which made many carved and painted altarpieces .
durer either drew his design directly onto the woodblock itself , or glued a paper to the block .
either way his drawing was destroyed during the cutting of the block .
during the same period durer trained himself in the difficult art of using the burin to make engravings .
in 1496 , giorgio vasari painted the " prodigal son " .
he made many madonnas , single religious figures , and small scenes with comic peasant figures .
these prints are very portable .
durer said that he learned much about the new developments in perspective , anatomy , and proportion from him .
durer began his own studies , which would become a lifelong preoccupation .
this is a series of drawings show durer 's experiments in human proportion .
durer made large numbers of preparatory drawings , especially for his paintings and engravings , and many survive .
in italy , he returned to painting .
these include portraits and altarpieces , notably the paumgartner altarpiece and the " adoration of the magi " .
in 1506 , he returned to venice and stayed there until the spring of 1507 .
in venice he was given a valuable commission from the emigrant german community for the church of san bartolomeo .
other paintings durer produced in venice include " the virgin and child with the goldfinch " , " christ among the doctors " supposedly produced in a mere five days ending , and a number of smaller works .
durer stayed in germany until 1520 .
his reputation had spread throughout europe and he was on friendly terms and in communication with most of the major artists including raphael , giovanni bellini and – mainly through lorenzo di credi — leonardo da vinci .
during this period he also completed two woodcut series , the " great passion " and the " life of the virgin " , both published in 1511 .
other works from this period include the thirty-seven woodcut subjects of the " little passion " , published first in 1511 , and a set of fifteen small engravings on the same theme in 1512 .
in 1513 and 1514 durer made his three most famous engravings : " knight , death , and the devil " — 1513 , probably based on erasmus 's book " enchiridion militis christiani " gibbons , " st . jerome in his study " , and the much-debated " melencolia i " , both died .
in 1515 , he created his woodcut of a rhinoceros which had arrived in lisbon .
it is still used in some german school science text-books late last last century .
in the years leading to 1520 he produced a wide range of works , including the woodblocks for the first western printed star charts in 1515 and portraits in tempera on linen in 1516 .
the design program and explanations were designed by johannes stabius , the architectural design by the master builder and court-painter jorg kolderer and the woodcutting itself by andreae , with durer as designer-in-chief .
" the arch " was followed by " the triumphal procession " , the program of which was worked out in 1512 by albrecht altdorfer and hans springinklee , as well as durer .
durer worked with pen on the marginal images for an edition of the emperor 's printed prayer-book .
durer also made several portraits of the emperor .
maximilian 's death came at a time when durer was concerned he was losing " my sight and freedom of hand " .
in july 1520 , durer made his fourth and last major journey , to renew the imperial pension maximilian had given him .
durer traveled with his wife and her maid through the rhine to cologne and then to antwerp .
this gives rare information of the monetary value placed on prints at this time .
while providing valuable documentary evidence , durer 's netherlandish diary also reveals that the trip was not a profitable one .
for example , durer offered his last portrait of maximilian to his daughter , margaret of austria .
he went to brussels to paint the king 's portrait .
durer also was collecting for his own cabinet of curiosities , and he sent back to nuremberg various animal horns , a piece of coral , some large fish fins , and a wooden weapon from the east indies .
durer returned home in july 1521 , having caught malaria .
on his return to nuremberg , durer worked on a number of religious themes , including a crucifixion scene and a sacra conversazione , though neither was completed .
this may have been due to his declining health , but perhaps also because of the time he gave to his theoretical works on geometry and perspective , the proportions of men and horses , and fortification .
durer produced comparatively little as an artist .
this last great work , the four apostles , was given by durer to the city of nuremberg .
he was very interested in learning much from his friend willibald pirckheimer , who he did not know much about the things he had had had made .
he also got great satisfaction from his friendships and correspondence with erasmus and other scholars .
it was published in nuremberg in 1525 .
his widow lived there until her death in 1539 .
durer wanted to draw luther in his diary in 1520 .
in 1524 , nicholas kratzer wrote a letter to nicholas kratzer in venice .
most tellingly , pirckheimer wrote in a letter to johann tscherte in 1530 : " i confess that in the beginning i believed in luther , like our albert of blessed memory . . but as anyone can see , the situation has become worse . "
durer had contacts with many reformers , such as zwingli , andreas karlstadt , melanchthon , erasmus and cornelius grapheus from whom durer received luther 's " babylonian captivity " in 1520 .
from 1525 , the year that saw the peak and collapse of the peasants ' war , the artist can be seen to distance himself from the lutheran movement .
durer 's later works have also been claimed to show protestant sympathies .
his woodcut of " the last supper " of 1523 has often been seen as an evangelical theme .
the delaying of the engraving of st philip , completed in 1523 but not distributed until 1526 , may have been due to durer 's uneasiness with images of saints .
durer had a huge influence on the artists of succeeding generations , especially in printmaking .
his work in engraving seems to have had an influence on his german successors , the " little masters " who attempted few large engravings but continued durer 's themes in small , rather cramped compositions .
lucas van leyden was the only northern european engraver to successfully make large engravings in the first third of the 16th century .
the generation of italian engravers who trained in the shadow of durer all either directly copied parts of his landscape backgrounds vaults : giulio campagnola , giovanni battista palumba , benedetto montagna and cristofano roberval , or whole printsmanship , or whole printsificificificificia raimondi and agostino venezianodonno .
this in turn travelled over the alps to dominate northern engraving .
his intense and self-dramatizing self-portraits have continued to have a strong influence up to the present , especially on painters in the 19th and 20th century who wanted a more dramatic portrait style .
durer has never fallen from critical favour , and there have been significant revivals of interest in his works in germany in the early nineteenth century , and in german nationalism from 1870 to 1945 .
durer used graphic expressions based on a vernacular , craftsmen 's language .
durer helped develop the work in german prose .
he built the gothic alphabet with a different system .
the fourth book completes the progression of the first and second by moving to three-dimensional forms and the construction of polyhedra .
finally , durer discusses the delian problem and moves on to the ' construzione legittima ' , a method of depicting a cube in two dimensions through linear perspective .
durer was taught ashore possibly by luca pacioli or bramante diameter the principles of linear perspective .
he was familiar with the ' short construction ' as described by alberti and the geometrical construction of shadows , a technique of leonardo da vinci .
he was the first northern european to treat things in a scientific way , and with understanding of euclidean principles .
durer discusses in this last book of " underweysung der messung " .
durer based these constructions on both vitruvius and empirical observations of " two to three hundred living persons " , in his own words .
the second book includes eight further types , broken down not into fractions but an albertian system , which durer probably learned from francesco di giorgio 's harmonica mundi totius of 1525 .
in the third book , durer gives principles by which the proportions of the figures can be modified , including the mathematical simulation of convex and concave mirrors .
durer worked on aesthetics between 1512 and 1528 .
he found it difficult to define the criteria for such a code .
unlike alberti and leonardo , durer was troubled by understanding not just the abstract notions of beauty but also as to how an artist can create beautiful images .
durer 's ideas helped start the concept of ' selective inward synthesis ' .
in other words , that an artist builds on a wealth of visual experiences in order to imagine beautiful things .
durer 's belief in the abilities of a single artist over inspiration prompted him to assert that " one man may sketch something with his pen on half a sheet of paper in one day , or may cut it into a tiny piece of wood with his little iron , and it turns out to be better and more artistic than another 's work at which diligence with the utmosts with its author . "
the albertina has the largest collection in the world of durer drawings with more than 140 works .
