woodwind instruments are a family of musical instruments .
common examples are flute , oboe , clarinet , bassoon , and saxophone .
there are two types of woodwind instruments : flutes and reed instruments — called reed pipes trombones .
these different instruments are the way they make their sound .
woodwinds make sound by splitting an exhaled air stream on a sharp edge , such as a reed or a fipple .
woodwinds may be made of any material , not just wood .
common examples include brass , silver , cane , gold and platinum .
woodwinds are usually made from woodwinds , but are usually made from woodwinds .
flutes make sound by directing a focused stream of air below the edge of a hole in a cylindrical tube .
the flute family can be divided into two families : open flutes and closed flutes .
to make a sound with an open flute , the player must blow a stream of air across a sharp edge that then splits the air stream .
this split air stream then acts upon the air column in the flute 's hollow causing it to vibrate and produce sound .
examples of open flutes are the transverse flute , panpipes and shakuhachi .
ancient flutes of this variety were made from tubular sections of plants such as grasses , reeds , and hollowed-out tree branches .
later , flutes were made of metals such as tin , copper , or bronze .
today , concert flutes are made of metal , usually with nickel , silver , copper , or gold .
to make a sound with a closed flute , the player must blow air into a duct .
this duct acts as a channel bringing the air to a sharp edge .
as with the open flutes , the air is then split .
the recorder is the most common instrument in the world .
reed instruments make sound by focusing air into a mouthpiece .
similar to flutes , reed pipes are also divided into two types : single reed and double reed .
single-reed woodwinds make sound by placing a reed onto the opening of a mouthpiecetagram using a ligaturefication .
the reed makes the sound move between the reed and the mouthpiece .
single reed instruments include the clarinet , saxophone , and other types such as the chalumeau .
double-reed instruments use two precisely cut , small pieces of cane bound together at the base .
this form of sound production has been thought to have originated in the middle to late neolithic period .
the finished , bound reed is inserted into the instrument and vibrates .
there are two sub-families : exposed double reed , and capped double reed instruments .
double-reed instruments are played by playing the double reed between the lips .
the family includes instruments such as the oboe , cor anglaislaislaisiaceae , english hornwatcher bassoon , and many types of shawms throughout the world .
capped double-reed instruments have the double reed covered by a cap .
the player blows through a hole in this cap .
the family includes the crumhorn .
bagpipes are unique reed pipe instruments .
bagpipes are functionally the same as a capped double reed instrument .
free reed aerophone instruments are also unique : sound is produced by ' free reeds ' – small metal tongues arranged in rows within a metal or wooden frame .
the airflow necessary for the instruments sound is generated either by a player 's breath controller , or by bellows waived .
the woodwind section is made up of flutes , oboes , clarinets , and bassoons .
the piccolo , cor anglais , bass clarinet , e-flat clarinet , and contrabassoon are commonly used supplementary woodwind instruments .
the section may also be made bigger by the addition of saxophone saxophonetou s c1 .
the concert band 's woodwind section is usually much larger and more diverse than the orchestra 's .
the concert band usually includes piccolos , flutes , oboes , b♭ clarinets , bassoons , alto saxophones , tenor saxophones , and baritone saxophones .
the cor anglais , eventlais , alto clarinet , contrabass clarinet , contrabass clarinet , contrabassoon , and soprano saxophone are also used .
