the serengeti ecosystem is a region in africa .
it is in northern tanzania .
it is about 3,000 km long .
the serengeti hosts the second largest terrestrial mammal migration in the world .
serengeti is also renowned for its large lion population .
serengeti national park is in tanzania .
there are about 70 large mammal and 500 bird species there .
there are many different kinds of habitats , including riverine forests , swamps , kopjes , grasslands and woodlands .
wildebeests , gazelles , zebras , and buffalos are some of the most common mammals in the region .
there has been a lot of controversy about a proposal to build a road through the serengeti .
serengeti is derived from the maasai language , maa .
most of the serengeti was known to outsiders as maasailand .
they are known as fierce warriors .
historically , their strength and reputation kept the newly arrived europeans from exploiting the animals and resources of most of their land .
a rinderpest epidemic and drought in the 1890s greatly reduced the numbers of both maasai and animal populations .
later in the 20th century , the tanzanian government settled the maasai around the ngorongoro crater .
poaching and the absence of fires , which had been the result of human activity , set the stage for the development of dense woodlands and thickets over the next 50 years .
tsetse fly populations now prevented any significant human settlement in the area .
by the mid-1970s wildebeest and the cape buffalo populations had recovered and were increasingly cropping the grass .
the reduced intensity of fires has allowed acacia to once again become established .
in the 21st century , mass rabies vaccination programmes for domestic dogs in the serengeti have not only indirectly prevented hundreds of human deaths , but also protected wildlife species such as the endangered african wild dog .
each year around the same time , the circular great wildebeest migration begins in the ngorongoro conservation area of the southern serengeti in tanzania .
this migration is a natural phenomenon determined by the availability of grazing .
the initial phase lasts from about january to march .
during february , the wildebeest spend their time on the short grass plains of the southeastern part of the ecosystem , grazing and giving birth to approximately 500,000 calves within a 2 to 3 week period .
few calves are born ahead of time .
the reason for this is that very young calves are more noticeable to predators when mixed with older calves from the previous year .
as the rains end in may , the animals start moving northwest into the areas around the grumeti river , where they usually stay until late june .
the crossings of the grumeti and mara rivers beginning in july are a popular safari attraction .
the herds arrive in kenya in late july / august .
in early november , with the start of the short rains , the migration starts moving south again , to the short grass plains of the southeast .
about 250,000 wildebeest die during the journey from tanzania to the maasai mara national reserve in southwestern kenya , a total of 800 km .
death is usually from thirst , hunger , starvation , or predation .
the serengeti has some of east africa 's finest game areas .
besides being known for the great migration , the serengeti is also famous for its large predators .
the ecosystem is home to over 3,000 lionsttered " panthera leo "arth , 1,000 leopardsttered " panthera pardus "dilly " cairo " , and 7,700 to 8,700 spotted hyenas spp . "
the east african cheetah are also present in serengeti .
wild dogs are scarce in much of the serengeti .
lions and spotted hyenas , predators that steal wild dog kills and are a direct cause of wild dog mortality , are abundant .
the serengeti is also home to a diversity of grazers , including african buffalo , warthogs , grant 's gazelle , eland , waterbuck , and topi .
the serengeti can support this remarkable variety of grazers .
wildebeests prefer to eat shorter grasses , while zebras prefer taller ones .
similarly , dik-diks eat the lowest leaves of a tree , impalas eat the leaves that are higher up , and giraffes eat leaves that are even higher .
tanzania and kenya have many protected areas , including national parks , conservation areas , and game reserves .
the southeastern part of the region is in the rain shadow of the ngorongoro conservation area 's highlands .
soils are high in nutrients .
a gradient of soil depth is northwestward across the plains .
about 70 km west , the state of victoria and the loita plains are at the point of the maasai mara national reserve .
the sixteen acacia species vary over this range .
near lake victoria , floodplains have developed from ancient lakebeds .
in the far northwest , acacia woodlands are replaced by broadleaved terminalia-combretum woodlands , caused by a change in geology .
this area has the highest rainfall in the system .
altitudes in the serengeti range from 920 to 9000 .
the climate is usually warm and dry .
rainfall amounts vary from a low of 508 mm in the lee of the ngorongoro highlands to a high of 1200 mm on the shores of lake victoria .
the highlands are considerably cooler than the plains and are covered by montane forests .
the serengeti plain is punctuated by granite and gneiss outcroppings known as kopjes .
these outcroppings are the result of volcanic activity .
kopjes are a microhabitat for non-plains wildlife .
one kopje is likely to be seen by visitors to the serengeti is the simba kopjeailing lion kopje frankly .
the conservation area is also home to the ngorongoro crater and the olduvai gorge .
