free-running sleep is a sleep pattern that is not adjusted ashore to the 24-hour cycle in nature .
sleep disorders are used in the study of circadian rhythms in biology .
study subjects are shielded from all time cues , often by a constant light protocol , or by the use of light / dark conditions to which the organism should be used .
also , limited amounts of food may be made available at short intervals so as to avoid entrainment to mealtimes .
they live by their " circadian " .
the individual 's or animal 's circadian phase is known only by the monitoring of some kind of output of the circadian system , the internal " body clock " .
the researcher can precisely determine , for example , the daily cycles of gene-activity , body temperature , blood pressure , hormone secretion , and / or sleep and activity / alertness .
alertness in humans can be determined by many kinds of verbal and non-verbal tests .
when animals or people free-run experiments , they can be done to see what sort of signals , known as zeitgebers , are effective in entrainment .
also , much work has been done to see how long or short a cycle of time to which different organisms can be entrained .
for example , some animals can be entrained to a 22-hour day , but they can not be entrained to a 20-hour day .
in recent studies , it has been shown that most humans can be entrained to a 23.5-hour day and to a 24.65-hour day .
the effect of unintended time cues is called " masking " .
examples of masking are morning rush traffic audible to the subjects , or researchers or maintenance staff visiting subjects on a regular schedule .
non-24-hour sleep – wake disorder -lrb- also called free-running disorder -rrb- is a sleep disorder in humans .
more than half of people are totally blind and a smaller number of sighted people .
among blind people , the cause is the inability to register , and therefore to entrain to , light cues .
the many blind people who do entrain to the 24-hour light / dark cycle have eyes with functioning retinas including operative non-visual light sensitive cells , iprgcs .
these ganglion cells , which contain melanopsin , are in the " circadian clock " .
frd is a term used in the teens or early twenties .
as with delayed sleep phase disorder , there are no symptoms or symptoms .
males are more sighted than females .
a quarter of people with frd also have a psychiatric condition .
the term " free-running sleep " has occasionally been used by non-scientists to mean intentional facilitation of the natural sleep / wake cycle .
free running sleep means that a person chooses to sleep when sleepy and to awaken spontaneously spontaneously turing without an alarm clock .
