the winner receives the kenesaw mountain landis memorial baseball award .
mvp voting takes place before the postseason .
the bbwaa began asking three writers in each league city in 1938 .
the bbwaa does not offer a clear-cut definition of what " most valuable " means , instead leaving the decision to the individual voters .
stan musial , alex rodriguez , and robin yount have won at different positions .
the award 's only tie occurred in the national league in 1979 .
the award has never been presented to a member of the following three teams : arizona diamondbacks , new york mets , and tampa bay rays .
when justin verlander won the al award in 2011 , he became the first pitcher in either league to be named the mvp since dennis eckersley in 1992 .
verlander also became the first starting pitcher to win this award since roger clemens accomplished the feat in 1986 .
the national league has gone longer without an mvp award to a pitcher .
before the 1910 season , hugh chalmers of chalmers automobile announced he would present a chalmers model 30 automobile to the player with the highest batting average in major league baseball at the end of the season .
the 1910 race for best average in the american league was between the detroit tigers ' widely disliked ty cobb and nap lajoie of the cleveland indians .
chalmers ended up giving cars to both players .
a committee of baseball writers were to meet after the season to determine the " most important and useful player to the club and to the league " .
since the award was not as effective at advertising as chalmers had hoped , it was discontinued after 1914 .
in 1922 the american league created a new award to honor " the baseball player who is of the greatest all-around service to his club " .
this resulted in the award being dropped after 1928 .
the bbwaa first awarded the modern mvp after the 1931 season .
one writer in each city with a team filled out a ten-place ballot , with ten points for the recipient of a first-place vote , nine for a second-place vote , and so on .
the only significant change since then took place in 1961 , when the number of voters was reduced to two per league city .
