The winners receive the Kenesaw Mountain Landis Memorial Baseball Award, which became the official name of the award in 1944, in honor of the first MLB commissioner, Kenesaw Mountain Landis, who served from 1920 until his death on November 25, 1944.
MVP voting takes place before the postseason, but the results are not announced until after the World Series.
The BBWAA began by polling three writers in each league city in 1938, reducing that number to two per league city in 1961.
The BBWAA does not offer a clear-cut definition of what "most valuable" means, instead leaving the judgment to the individual voters.
Hank Greenberg, Stan Musial, Alex Rodriguez, and Robin Yount have won at different positions, while Rodriguez is the only player who has won the award with two different teams at two different positions.
The award's only tie occurred in the National League in 1979, when Keith Hernandez and Willie Stargell received an equal number of points.
The award has never been presented to a member of the following three teams: Arizona Diamondbacks, New York Mets, and Tampa Bay Rays.
When Justin Verlander won the AL award in 2011, he became the first pitcher in either league to be named the MVP since Dennis Eckersley in 1992.
Verlander also became the first starting pitcher to win this award since Roger Clemens accomplished the feat in 1986.
The National League went even longer without an MVP award to a pitcher.
Before the 1910 season, Hugh Chalmers of Chalmers Automobile announced he would present a Chalmers Model 30 automobile to the player with the highest batting average in Major League Baseball at the end of the season.
The 1910 race for best average in the American League was between the Detroit Tigers' widely disliked Ty Cobb and Nap Lajoie of the Cleveland Indians.
American League President Ban Johnson said a recalculation showed that Cobb had won the race anyway, and Chalmers ended up awarding cars to both players.
A committee of baseball writers were to convene after the season to determine the "most important and useful player to the club and to the league".
Since the award was not as effective at advertising as Chalmers had hoped, it was discontinued after 1914.
In 1922 the American League created a new award to honor "the baseball player who is of the greatest all-around service to his club".
Famously, these criteria resulted in Babe Ruth winning only a single MVP award before it was dropped after 1928.
The BBWAA first awarded the modern MVP after the 1931 season, adopting the format the National League used to distribute its league award.
One writer in each city with a team filled out a ten-place ballot, with ten points for the recipient of a first-place vote, nine for a second-place vote, and so on.
The only significant change since then occurred in 1961, when the number of voters was reduced to two per league city.