the riemann zeta function is a function of a complex variable " s " that analytically continues the sum of the dirichlet series .
which converges when the real part of s is greater than 1 .
more general representations of " ζ " ¥ " s " represent all s below .
the riemann zeta function is a key role in analytic number theory .
leonhard euler first used the function of a real variable in the eighteenth century .
bernhard riemann 's 1859 article " on the number of primes less than a given magnitude " extended the euler definition to a complex variable , proved its meromorphic continuation and functional equation , and established a relation between its zeros and the distribution of prime numbers .
the riemann zeta function at even positive integers is computed by euler .
the riemann zeta function is a function of a complex variable .
the riemann zeta function is defined as the continuation of the function defined for " σ " > 1 by the sum of the preceding series .
leonhard euler considered the above series in 1740 for positive integer values of s , and later chebyshev extended the definition to retify " s " > 1 .
the above series is a prototypical dirichlet series that converges absolutely to an analytic function for s such that σ > 1 and diverges for all other values of s .
riemann showed that the function defined by the series on the half-plane of convergence can be continued analytically to all complex values " s " = 1 .
for the series is the harmonic series which diverges to + ∞ , and also in the same case as the harmonic series .
the riemann zeta function is a meromorphic function on the whole complex s-plane , which is holomorphic everywhere except for a simple pole at with residue 1 .
where " b " is the 2 " n " th bernoulli number .
for odd positive integers , no such simple expression is known , although these values are related to the algebraic k-theory of the integers .
in particular , ζ vanishes at the negative even integers because for all odd m other than 1 .
these are the so-called " trivial zeros " of the zeta function .
euler proved the connection between the zeta function and prime numbers was discovered by euler , who proved the identity of the zeta function .
the proof of euler 's identity uses only the formula for the geometric series and the fundamental theorem of arithmetic .
since the harmonic series , obtained when , diverges , euler 's formula becomes [unk] ¥ .
now , for distinct primes , these divisibility events are mutually independent .
when s is an even positive integer , the product sin γsport 1-" s "nton on the right is non-zero .