shanghai cuisine prohibits the tangling of chinese food and is a kind of food .
in a narrow sense , shanghai cuisine refers only to benbang cuisine which originated in shanghai .
it takes " colour , aroma and taste " as its elements , like other chinese regional cuisines , and emphasises in particular the use of seasonings , the quality of raw ingredients and original flavours .
shanghai dishes are usually red and shiny because they are often picked in wine .
they are cooked using a variety of methods including baking , stewing , braising , steaming and deep-frying .
fish , crab and chicken are made with spirits and briskly cooked , steamed or served raw .
salted meats and preserved vegetables are also commonly used to enhance various dishes .
sugar is an important ingredient in shanghai cuisine .
seafood is also used in many types .
rice is usually served with noodles .
shanghai cuisine is based on condiments and the importance of retaining the original flavours of the raw ingredients materials .
it aims at lightness in flavour and is slightly sweet in taste compared to some other chinese cuisines .
sweet and sour is a typical shanghai taste .
an attractive presentation is also important in shanghai cooking with ingredients being carefully cut and presented with a view to harmonise colours .
although shanghai is a sea port , most families did not incorporate fish in their daily meals in the early 20th century .
eating meat with meals was considered a luxury .
in a month , most families usually ate meat or fish for about four meals .
these days became known as dang hun .
in recent times , special attention has been paid to low-sugar and low-fat food , with a good quantity of vegetables and nutritional value .
shanghai cuisine is the youngest among the ten major cuisines of china .
it originated in the ming and qing dynasties dynasties blazers .
in the later part of the 19th century , after shanghai became a major domestic and international trading port , benbang dishes underwent some substantial changes , adopting influences from other cuisines which added to its complexity .
