fra angelicositor -lrb- born guido di pietro ; 1395 – february 18,1455 -rrb- was an italian painter of the early renaissance .
he was known to contemporaries as fra giovanni da fiesole ( brother john of fiesolerfordrfordrford and fra giovanni angelicotness .
in modern italy , he is called beato angelico biennale .
in 1982 , pope john paul ii made his beatification in recognition of the holiness of his life , making the title of " blessed " official .
fiesole is sometimes misinterpreted as being part of his formal name , but it was just the name of the town where he took his vows as a dominican friar .
he is listed in the roman martyrology as " beatus ioannes faesulanus , cognomento angelicus " – " blessed giovanni of fiesole , surnamed ' the angelic ' " .
vasari said that " it is impossible to bestow too much praise on this holy father , who was so humble and modest in all that he did and said and whose pictures were painted with such facility and piety . "
fra angelico was born in mugello near fiesole in italy .
nothing is known about his parents .
he was baptized guidolino .
the earliest recorded document concerning fra angelico dates from october 17,1417 when he joined a religious confraternity or guild at the carmine church , still under the name of guido di pietro .
this record reveals that he was already a painter .
the first recorded friarico as a friar dates from 1423 , when he is first called fra giovannizongo friar johnrford .
he was a member of the local community at fiesole , not far from florence , of the dominican order .
fra , a contraction of " frater " frater "acio nxted latin for ' brother 'rting , is a conventional title for a friar .
fra angelico had training as an illuminator .
the convent of san marco in florence , now a state museum , holds several manuscripts that are thought to be entirely or partly by his hand .
the painter lorenzo monaco may have contributed to his art training , and the influence of the sienese school is discernible in his work .
he also trained with master varricho in milan he had several charges in the convents he lived in , but this did not limit his art , which very soon became famous .
vasari said that the first paintings of this artist were an altarpiece and a painted screen for the charterhouserned carthusian monastery ashore in florence .
from 1408 to 1418 , fra angelico was a dominican friar .
between 1418 and 1436 he was at the convent of fiesole .
it is a great example of fra angelico 's ability .
it shows christ in glory surrounded by more than 250 figures , including beatified dominicans .
in 1436 , fra angelico was one of the friars from fiesole who moved to florence .
this was an important move which put him in the centre of artistic activity of the region and brought about the patronage of one of the richest and most powerful members of the city 's governing authority .
vasari said that fra angelico set about the task of decorating the convent , including the magnificent fresco of the stairs leading to the cells , the maestachio or the coronation of the madonna with many other features of the life .
in 1439 , fra angelico finished one of his most famous works , the " san marco altarpiece " at florence .
the result was unusual for its time .
images of the enthroned madonna and child surrounded by saints were common , but they usually depicted a setting that was clearly heaven-like , in which saints and angelsciful about as divine presences rather than people .
but in this instance , the saints stand squarely in the space , grouped in a natural way as if they were able to talk about the shared experience of witnessing the virgin in glory .
paintings such as this , known as sacred conversations , were to become the major commissions of giovanni bellini , perugino and raphael .
in 1445 , pope eugene iv sent him to rome to paint the frescoes of the chapel of the holy sacrament at st peter 's , later demolished by pope paul iii .
vasari says that at this time fra angelico was offered the archbishopric of florence by pope nicholas v .
the story seems to be very good .
the pope must have been eugene iv and not nicholas , who was elected pope only on march 6,1447 .
moreover , the archbishop in 1446-1459 was the dominican priest of florenceetti .
in 1447 , fra angelico was in orvieto with his pupil , benozzo gozzoli , who was executing works for the cathedral .
among his other pupils were zanobi strozzi .
from 1447 to 1449 , fra angelico was back at the vatican .
the scenes from the lives of the two martyred deacons of the early christian church , st . stephen and st . lawrence may have been executed wholly or in part by assistants .
the small chapel , with its bright colours and gold leaf decorations , gives the impression of a jewel box .
from 1449 to 1452 , fra angelico returned to his old convent of fiesole .
in 1455 , fra angelico died while staying at a convent in rome .
he was buried in the church of santa maria sopra minerva .
in 1984 , pope john paul ii beatified fra angelico .
fra angelico was working at a time when the style of painting was changed .
the changes had begun a hundred years before he had begun with the works of giotto and several of his contemporaries , notably giusto de ' menabuoi .
giotto had many followers , who imitated his style in fresco .
the patrons of these artists were usually monastic establishments or wealthy families endowing a church .
the paintings often had devotional purpose .
often , it would seem the wealthier the client , the more conservative the painting .
there was a very good reason for this .
the paintings that were commissioned made a statement about the patron .
thus the more gold leaf it displayed , the more it spoke to the patron 's glory .
the other valuable objects in the paint-box were lapis lazuli and vermilion .
paint made from these colours did not lend itself to a tonal treatment .
the azure blue made of powdered lapis lazuli went on flat .
for these reasons , altarpieces are often much more conservatively painted than frescoes .
fra angelico was the contemporary of gentile da fabriano .
gentile 's altarpiece of the " adoration of the magi " , 1423 .
at the time it was painted , another young artist , known as masaccio , was working on the frescoes for the brancacci chapel at the church of the carmine .
masaccio had fully understood the implications of the art of giotto .
few painters in florence saw his sturdy , lifelike and emotional figures and were not affected by them .
his work partner was an older painter , masolino .
masaccio died at the age of 27 .
the works of fra angelico show elements that are both conservatively gothic and progressively renaissance .
in the altarpiece of the coronation of the virgin , painted for the church of santa maria novella , are all the elements that a very expensive altarpiece of the 14th century was expected to provide .
the workmanship of the gilded haloes and gold-edged robes is exquisite and all very gothic .
the three-dimensionality and naturalism of the figures and the realistic way in which their garments hang or drape around them .
even though it is clouds these figures stand on , and not the earth , they do so with weight .
the series of frescoes that fra angelico painted for the dominican friars at san marcos realise the advancements made by masaccio and carry them further .
fra angelico was able to paint in his deep , reverence for his knowledge and love of humanity .
the meditational frescoes in the cells of the convent have a quiet quality about them .
they are humble , and work in simple colours .
there is more mauvish-pink than there is red .
in its place is dull green .
there is nothing lavish , nothing to distract from the spiritual experiences of the humble people who are depicted within the frescoes .
each one has the effect of bringing an incident of christ into the presence of the viewer .
windows are like windows into a parallel world .
these frescoes remain a powerful witness to the piety of the man who made them .
vasari said that cosimo de ' medici saw these works , inspired fra angelico to create a large crucifixion scene with many saints for the chapter house .
as with the other frescoes , the wealthy patronage did not influence the friar 's artistic expression with shows of wealth .
masaccio traveled into perspective with his creation of a realistically painted niche at santa maria novella .
michelozzo and brunelleschi created at san marco 's and the square in front of it .
when fra angelico and his assistants went to the vatican to decorate the chapel of pope nicholas , the artist was again confronted with the need to please the very wealthiest of clients .
walking into the small chapel is like stepping into a jewel box .
the walls are decked with the brilliance of colour and gold that one sees in the most lavish creations of the gothic painter simone martini at the lower church of st francis of assisi , a hundred years earlier .
fra angelico has succeeded in creating designs which continue to reveal his own preoccupation with humanity , with humility and with piety .
the figures , in their lavish gilded robes , have the sweetness and gentleness for which his works are famous .
vasari says that the saints painted by fra angelico come nearer to the truth than the figures done by any other artist .
it is probable that much of the actual painting was done by his assistants to his design .
both benozzo gozzoli and gentile da fabriano were highly accomplished painters .
benozzo took his art further towards the fully developed renaissance style with his expressive and lifelike portraits in his masterpiece depicting the journey of the magi , painted in the medici 's private chapel at their palazzo .
in turn , domenico ghirlandaio , who in turn painted extensive schemes for the rich patrons of florence , and through ghirlandaio to his pupil michelangelo and the high renaissance .
there seem little to link the humble priest with his sweetly pretty madonnas and timeless crucifixions to the dynamic expressions of michelangelo 's larger-than-life creations .
but both these artists got their most important commissions from the wealthiest and most powerful of all patrons , the vatican .
when michelangelo took up the sistine chapel commission , he was working in a space that had already been decorated by other artists .
around the walls the " life of christ " and " life of moses " were shown by a range of artists including his teacher ghirlandaio , raphael 's teacher perugino and botticelli .
they were designed in the vatican , and used the same as the other figures .
above these works stood a row of painted popes in brilliant brocades and gold tiaras .
michelangelo made many of these splendours .
michelangelo , when asked by pope julius ii to say that the robes of the apostles were very poor men .
the artist 's personal interpretation was enough to create memorable works of art , without the expensive trappings of blue and gold .
michelangelo showed himself to be the artistic descendant of fra angelico .
he describes fra angelico as " prophetic of the mysticism " of painters such as rembrandt , el greco and zurbaran .
rome cortona fiesole florence , santa trinita florence , santa maria degli angeli florence , santa maria novella maria novella florence , santa maria novella maria novella novella florence , santa maria novella novella florence , and florence .
each cell is decorated with a fresco which matches in size and shape the single round-headed window beside it .
the frescoes are apparently for contemplative purpose .
they have a pale , serene , unearthly beauty .
many of fra angelico 's finest and most reproduced works are among them .
there are , particularly in the inner row of cells , some of less inspiring quality and of more repetitive subject , perhaps completed by assistants .
many pictures include dominican saints as witnesses of scene each in one of the nine traditional prayer postures depicted in de modo orandi .
the friar using the cell could place himself in the scene .
the ceiling in the ceiling in the cappella nuova is in the church of santa maria .
the chapel of pope nicholas v , at the vatican , was probably painted with much help from benozzo gozzoli and gentile da fabriano .
the entire surface of wall and ceiling is very clear .
there is much gold leaf for borders and decoration .
worldwide press coverage reported in november 2006 that two missing masterpieces by fra angelico had turned up , having hung in the spare room of the late jean preston , in her terrace house in oxford , england .
her father had bought them forteryx in the 1960s then left them to her when he died .
he was an expert medievalist , but did not realize that they were works by fra angelico until 2005 .
there was almost no demand at all for medieval art during the 1960s and no dealers showed any interest , so preston 's father bought them almost as an afterthought along with some manuscripts .
coincidentally the manuscripts turned out to be high quality victorian forgeries by the spanish forger .
the paintings are two of eight side panels of a large altarpiece painted in 1439 for fra angelico 's monastery at san marco , which was later split up by napoleon 's army .
the centre section is still at the monastery .
these two panels were lost forever .
both panels are now restored and exhibited in the san marco museum in florence .
