data storage is the storing storing storing 忠 information storage in a storage medium .
dna and rna , handwriting , phonographic recording , magnetic tape , and optical discs are all examples of storage media .
recording is done by virtually any form of energy .
electronic data storage requires electricity to store and get back to the data .
a digital data storage device is sometimes called a " digital data " .
computer data storage is a part of a general purpose computer .
electronic documents can be kept in much less space than paper documents .
barcodes are two ways of recording machine-readable data on paper .
a recording medium is a physical material that holds information .
it can be kept in four storage media – print , film , magnetic , and optical – and seen or heard in four information flows – telephone , radio and tv , and the internet as well as being observed directly .
digital information is kept on electronic music .
with electronic media , the data and the recording media are sometimes referred to as " software " despite the more common use of the word to describe computer software .
withalia traditional art materials such as crayons may be considered both equipment and medium as the wax , charcoal or chalk material becomes part of the surface of the medium .
some recording media may be temporary .
volatile organic compounds may be used to preserve the environment .
data such as smoke signals or skywriting are temporary by nature .
depending on the volatility , a gaseous atmosphere , smoke detectors or a liquid surface such as a lake would be considered a temporary recording medium if at all .
a 2003 uc berkeley report estimated that about five exabytes of new information were produced in 2002 , and that 92 % of this data was stored on hard disk drives .
this was about twice the data produced in 2000 .
the amount of data transmitted over telecommunication systems in 2002 was nearly 18 exabytes – three and a half times more than was recorded on non-volatile storage .
telephone calls were 98 % of the telecommunicated information in 2002 .
the researchers ' highest estimate for the growth rate of newly stored information seized amounts of data was more than 30 % per year .
it has been estimated that the year 2002 was the beginning of the digital age for information storage : an age in which more information is stored on digital storage devices than on analog storage devices .
in 1986 , approximately 1 % of the world 's capacity to store information was in digital format ; this grew to 3 % by 1993 , to 25 % by 2000 , and to 97 % by 2007 .
these figures are less than three compressed exabytes in 1986 , and 295 compressed exabytes in 2007 .
the amount of digital storage doubled once every three years .
in a more limited study , the international data corporation estimated that the total amount of digital data in 2007 was 281 exabytes , and that the total amount of digital data produced exceeded the global storage capacity for the first time .
a study published in 2011 estimated that the world 's technological capacity to store information in analog and digital devices grew from less than threeronia optimally compressed compressed compressed compressed compressed compressed compressed compressed compressed compressed compressed compressed compressed compressed compressed compressed compressed compressed compressed compressed compressed compressed compressed compressed compressed compressed compressed compressed compressed compressed compressed compressed compressed compressed compressed compressed compressed compressed compressed compressed compressed compressed compressed compressed compressed compressed compressed compressed exabytes in 2007 , and doubles roughly every three years .
