a player characterhesis is a fictional character in a role-playing game whose actions are directly controlled by a player of the game rather than the rules of the game .
the actions of non-player characters are usually handled by the game itself in video games , or according to rules followed by a gamemaster refereeing tabletop role-playing games .
the player character acts as a fictional , different body for the player using the character .
most video games have one player character for each person playing the game .
some games offer a group of player characters for the player to choose from , allowing the player to control one of them at a time .
where more than one player character is available , the characters may have different abilities , strengths , and weaknesses to make the game play style different .
historical people and leaders may sometimes appear as characters too , particularly in strategy or empire building games such as in sid meier 's " civilization " series .
such a player character is more properly an avatar as the player character 's name and image typically have little or no bearing on the game itself .
some games will go even further , never showing or naming the player-character at all .
fighting games usually have a larger number of player characters to choose from , with some basic moves available to all or most characters and some unique moves only available to one or a few characters .
having many different characters to play as and against , all with different moves and abilities , is necessary to create a larger gameplay variety in such games .
the characters can be given as a player can get more rank and experience points through accomplishing goals or fighting enemies .
a secret or unlockable character is a playable character in a video game that is only available after completing the game or meeting another requirement .
in some video games , characters that are not secret but appear only as non-player characters like bosses or enemies become playable characters after completing certain requirements , or sometimes cheating .