a player characterhesis is a fictional character in a role-playing game whose actions are directly controlled by a player of the game rather than the rules of the game .
the characters that are not controlled by a player are called non-player characters whose names are nxtxted .
the actions of non-player characters are usually handled by the game itself in video games , or according to rules followed by a gamemaster refereeing tabletop role-playing games .
the player character acts as a fictional , different body for the player using the character .
most video games have one player character for each person playing the game .
some games offer a group of player characters for the player to choose from , allowing the player to control one of them at a time .
where more than one player character is available , the characters may have different abilities , strengths , and weaknesses to make the game play style different .
a player character may sometimes be based on a real person , especially in sports games that use the names and likenesses of real sports people .
historical people and leaders may sometimes appear as characters too , particularly in strategy or empire building games such as in sid meier 's " civilization " series .
according to the case of civilization , a player 's chosen historical character is the same throughout the course of the game .
such a player character is more properly an avatar as the player character 's name and image typically have little or no bearing on the game itself .
avatars are also commonly seen in casino game simulations .
in many video games , the player character is a " blank slate " .
crono , link , and chell are examples of such characters .
these characters often do not speak .
some games will go even further , never showing or naming the player-character at all .
it is somewhat common in first-person video games , such as in " myst " .
in such games , the player has a characteruration instead of an omnipresent statuseux .
in gaming culture , such a character was called ageless , faceless , gender-neutral , culturally ambiguous adventure person .
fighting games usually have a larger number of player characters to choose from , with some basic moves available to all or most characters and some unique moves only available to one or a few characters .
having many different characters to play as and against , all with different moves and abilities , is necessary to create a larger gameplay variety in such games .
in role-playing games such as " dungeons & dragons " or " final fantasy " , a player typically creates or takes on the identity of a character that may have nothing in common with the player .
the character is often of a certain legally fictional race .
the characters can be given as a player can get more rank and experience points through accomplishing goals or fighting enemies .
a secret or unlockable character is a playable character in a video game that is only available after completing the game or meeting another requirement .
in some video games , characters that are not secret but appear only as non-player characters like bosses or enemies become playable characters after completing certain requirements , or sometimes cheating .
