sir andrew john wilestaff -lrb- born 11 april 1953 -rrb- is an english mathematician .
he is best known for proving fermat 's last theorem .
he was appointed a knight commander of the order of the british empire in 2000 .
wiles was born in cambridge , england .
his father was a chaplain at ridley hall , cambridge , for the years 1952-55 .
wiles studied at king 's college school , cambridge , and the leys school , cambridge .
wiles states that he came across fermat 's last theorem when he was 10 years old .
he stopped at his local library .
fascinated by the existence of a theorem that was so easy to state that he could understand it , but that no one had proven , he decided to be the first person to prove it .
gerhard frey had previously linked to fermat 's famous equation .
wiles earned his bachelor 's degree in mathematics in 1974 at merton college , oxford , and a phd in 1980 as a graduate student of clare college , cambridge .
after a stay at the institute for advanced study in princeton , new jersey , wiles became a professor of mathematics at princeton university .
wiles was a guggenheim fellow at the institut des hautes etudes scientifiques near paris and at the e cole normale superieure .
wiles was a royal society research professor at the university of oxford from 1988 to 1990 .
wiles was a eugene higgins professor at princeton .
he was appointed royal society research professor in 2011 .
in 2018 , he became regius professor of mathematics at oxford , the first in the university 's history .
wiles 's graduate research was guided by john coates beginning in the summer of 1975 .
together these colleagues worked on the arithmetic of elliptic curves with complex multiplication by the methods of iwasawa theory .
soon after , he made this theory into totally real fields .
he is remembered today as the author of the book " andrew has few equals in terms of his impact on modern number theory .
many of the world ’ s very best young number theorists received their phds under andrew .
gerhard frey , jean-pierre serre and ken ribet said that fermat 's last theorem could be proven as a corollary of a limited form of the modularity theorem unproven at the time and then known as the taniyamural conjecture .
the modularity theorem involved elliptic curves , which was also wiles ' own specialist area .
mathematicians thought the conjecture was important , but it was difficult to prove .
for example , wiles ' ex-supervisor john coates said that it seemed " impossible to actually prove " .
despite this , wiles , with his from childhood fascination with fermat 's last theorem , decided to challenge the conjecture , at least to the extent needed for frey 's curve .
he dedicated all of his research time to this problem for over six years in secrecy .
in june 1993 , he gave his proof to the public for the first time at a conference in cambridge .
in august 1993 , it was discovered that the proof contained a gap in one area .
wiles tried to fill the gap .
this came to him on 19 september 1994 .
together with his former student richard taylor , he published a second paper .
both papers were published in 1995 in a special issue of the " annals of mathematics " .
wiles ' proof of fermat 's last theorem has stood up to the scrutiny of the world 's other mathematical experts .
wiles was interviewed for an episode of the bbc documentary series " horizon " that focused on fermat 's last theorem .
this was renamed " the proof " .
his work and life are also described in great detail in simon singh 's popular book " fermat 's last theorem " .
