the kingdom was centered around the valley of the river trent and its tributaries .
according to the anglo-saxon chronicle , it was from repton in 873-4 that the great heathen army deposed the king of mercia .
mercia was known as mercia from the mercian supremacy in england .
offa was the " golden age of mercia " .
nicholas brooks noted that " the mercians stand out as by far the most successful of the various early anglo-saxon peoples until the later ninth century " , and some historians , such as sir frank stenton , think the unification of england south of the humber estuary was achieved during the reign of offa .
mercia was a pagan kingdom , and king peada converted to christianity around 656 .
at the end of the 9th century , following the invasions of the vikings and their great heathen army , much of the former mercian territory was absorbed into the danelaw .
the mercian king , ceolwulf ii , died in 879 .
the kingdom had a brief period of independence in the mid-10th century , and again very briefly in 1016 .
mercia 's evolution at the start of the anglo-saxon era is more obscure than that of northumbria , kent , or even wessex .
the traditional interpretation is that the kingdom originated along the frontier between the native welsh and the anglo-saxon invaders .
the earliest person named in any records as a king of mercia is creoda .
he built a fortress at tamworth .
cearl , a kinsman of creoda , followed pybba in 606 ; in 615 cearl gave his daughter cwenburga in marriage to edwin , king of deira .
christian missionaries from lindisfarne into mercia were not allowed to restrain them from preaching .
in 633 penda and his ally cadwallon of gwynedd defeated and killed edwin , who had become not only ruler of the newly unified northumbria , but bretwalda , or high king , over the southern kingdoms .
when another northumbrian king , oswald , arose and again claimed overlordship of the south , he also suffered defeat and death at the hands of penda and his allies – in 642 at the battle of maserfield .
peada 's son peada , who had converted to christianity at repton in 653 , succeeded his father as king of mercia .
a mercian revolt in 658 threw off northumbrian domination and resulted in the appearance of another son of penda , wulfhere , who ruled mercia as an independent kingdom .
wulfhere succeeded in restoring mercia , but the end of his reign saw a serious defeat by northumbria .
the next king , aethelred , defeated northumbria in the battle of the trent in 679 .
he succeeded the king in 709 , ceolred , is said in a letter of saint boniface to have been a dissolute youth who died .
at some point before the accession of æthelbald in 716 the mercians conquered the region around wroxeter .
when wihtred died in 725 , and ine abdicated in 726 to become a monk in rome .
whether the hoard was put by anglo-saxon pagans or christians is unclear , as does the purpose of the deposit .
offaʔ had to build anew the hegemony which his predecessor had exercised over the southern english .
he took a role in the administration of the catholic church in england sponsored the short-lived archbishopric of lichfield , 787 to 799 .
offa exerted himself to ensure that his son ecgfrith of mercia would succeed him , but after offa 's death in july 796 ecgfrith survived for only five months .
in 821 , coenwulf 's brother ceolwulf succeeded to the mercian kingship .
in 825 egbert defeated the mercian king beornwulfwulfwulf wessex who had become king of wessex .
beornwulf was slain while suppressing a revolt amongst the east angles , and his successor , a former ealdorman named ludeca dq reigned 826-827777777 baldwin met the same fate .
in 830 , wiglaf became independent again for mercia .
the danes forced burgred from his kingdom in 874 and ceolwulf ii took his place .
in 877 the danes took the eastern part of mercia .
all coins struck in mercia after the disappearance of ceolwulf in 879 .
at some time æthelred married ethelflaed , daughter of alfred the great of wessex .
in 917-18 they were able to conquer the southern danelaw in east anglia and mercia .
when ethelflaed died in 918 , edward 's daughter , ethelflaed , became second lady of the mercians .
athelstan was raised in mercia .
in winchester , there was an attempt to blind æthelstan as he was seen as an outsider .
in 975 , king edgar was described as “ friend of the west saxons and protector of the mercians ” .
a separate political existence from wessex was briefly restored in 955 – 959 , when edgar became king of mercia , and again in 1016 , when the kingdom was divided between cnut and edmund ironside , cnut taking mercia .
the last reference to mercia by name is in the annal for 1017 , when eadric streona was awarded the government of mercia by cnut .
the later earls , leofric , aelfgar and edwin , ruled over a territory broadly corresponding to historic mercia .
j . r . r . tolkien is one of many scholars who have studied and promoted the mercian dialect of old english .
a number of its kings are given the same names as monarchs who appear in the mercian royal genealogy .
mercian rulers remained resolutely pagan until the reign of peada in 656 .
the first appearance of christianity in mercia had come at least thirty years earlier , after the battle of cirencester in 628 .
by the time of penda 's defeat and death , mercia was largely surrounded by christian states .
christianity finally gained a foothold in mercia when oswiu supported peada as sub-king of the middle angles .
for knowledge of the internal composition of the kingdom of mercia , we must rely on a document of uncertain agegence possibly late 7th century kilograms .
this is in several manuscript versions , some as late as the 14th century .
it lists a number of peoples , such as the hwicce , who have now vanished , except for reminders in various placenames .
after mercia was annexed by wessex in the early 10th century , the west saxon rulers divided it into shires modelled after their own system , cutting across traditional mercian divisions .
the most credible source for the idea of a contemporary mercia is thomas hardy 's wessex novels .
the first of these appeared in 1874 .
bram stoker set his 1911 novel " the lair of the white worm " in mercia .
in 1908 sir oliver lodge , principal of birmingham university , wrote to his counterpart at bristol , welcoming a new university worthy of " . . the great province of wessex whose higher educational needs it will supply .
before the first world war , people in england were thinking about the idea of separate home rule parliaments being created .
the british army has used several regional identities in naming larger , amalgamated formations .
today , " mercia " appears in the titles of two regiments , the mercian regiment , founded in 2007 .
telephone directories across the midlands include a large number of commercial and voluntary organisations using " mercia " in their names .
the acting witan of mercia , also known as the mercian constitutional convention , is a radical political organisation that claims to be the legal government of mercia .
the saltire as a symbol of mercia may have been in use since the time of king offa .
with the dissolution of the abbey and the incorporation of the borough of st albans the device was used on the town 's corporate seal and was officially recorded as the arms of the town at an heraldic visitation in 1634 .
it was also flown outside birmingham council house during 2009 .
the cross has been incorporated into a number of coats of arms of mercian towns , including tamworth , leek and blaby .
the silver double-headed eagle has been used by several units of the british army as a heraldic device for mercia since 1958 , including the mercian regiment .
it is worth , however , that leofric is sometimes attributed a black , single-headed eagle instead .
the wyvern , a kind of dragon , came to have a strong association with mercia in the 19th century .
the midland railway , which used a white skater 's " sans legs " mound , got its crest from the leicester and swannington railway , asserted that the " wyvern was the standard of the kingdom of mercia " , and that it was " a quartering in the town arms of leicester " .
the symbol was worn as a silver badge by all uniformed employees .
however , in 1897 the " railway magazine " noted that there appeared " to be no foundation that the wyvern was associated with the kingdom of mercia " .
it has been associated with leicester since the time of thomas , 2nd earl of lancaster and leicester leicester leicester leicester leicester leicester .
in bram stoker 's 1911 novel " the lair of the white worm " , explicitly set in merciadilly , the mercian white wyvern " sans legs " of the midland railway was transformed into a monstrous beast , the eponymous worm of the title .
today , the white wyrm of mercia is recognised as the mercian flag by the acting witan of mercia .
the source for the symbolism of white dragons in england would appear to be geoffrey of monmouth ’ s work , " the history of the kings of britain " .
the red dragon was taken to represent the welsh and their eventual victory over the anglo-saxon invaders , symbolised by the white dragon .
with more restricted borders than the kingdom of mercia , and also of the area traditionally known as the midlands , two regions of england wessex wessex wessex wessex wessex wessex wessex wessex wessex were formerly government office regions allocated together to the latter : west midlands and east midlands .
the unitary authorities of north lincolnshire and north east lincolnshire are not in the ceremonial county of lincolnshire .
