sociobiology is a field of biology .
it draws from ethology , anthropology , evolution , zoology , archaeology , and population genetics .
sociobiology is closely related to darwinian anthropology , human behaviour and evolutionary psychology .
sociobiology investigates social behaviour , such as mating patterns , territorial fights , pack hunting , and the hive society of social insects .
selection pressure led to the genetic evolution of advantageous social behaviour .
the term " sociobiology " originated at least as early as the 1940s .
the new field quickly became the subject of controversy .
they argued that genes played a role in human behaviour , but that traits such as aggressiveness could be explained by social environment rather than by biology .
sociobiologists responded by pointing to the complex relationship between nature and nurture .
e . o . wilson defined sociobiology as “ the extension of population biology and evolutionary theory to social organization ” .
sociobiology is based on the premise that some behaviorsenko are at least partly inherited and can be affected by natural selection .
it begins with the idea that behaviours of a species have evolved over time , similar to the way that physical traits evolved .
it predicts that animals will act in ways that have proven to be evolutionarily successful over time .
this can result in the formation of complex social processes conducive to evolutionary fitness .
the idea is to explain behaviour as a product of natural selection .
behavior is seen as an effort to preserve one 's genes in the population .
it is the idea that certain genes or gene combinations influence particular behavioral traits can be inherited from generation to generation .
for example , newly dominant male lions will kill cubs in the pride that they did not sire .
this behavior is adaptive because killing the cubs eliminates competition for their own offspring .
sociobiologists view this instinctual cub-killing behavior as being inherited through the genes of successfully reproducing male lions , whereas non-killing behavior may have died out as those lions were less successful in reproducing .
the philosopher of biology daniel dennett suggested that the political philosopher thomas hobbes was the first sociobiologist .
the geneticist of animal behavior john paul scott coined the word " sociobiology " at a conference on genetics and social behaviour which called for a conjoint development of field and laboratory studies in animal behavior research .
with john paul scott 's organizational efforts , a section of animal behavior and sociobiology of the esannadora acronym stands for ?
was created in 1956 .
in 1956 , e . o . wilson came in contact this emerging sociobiology through his phd student stuart a . altmann .
altmann developed his own brand of sociobiology to study the social behavior of rhesus macaques using statistics .
wilson 's sociobiology is different from john paul scott 's or altmann 's , insofar as he drew on mathematical models of social behavior centered on the maximisation of the genetic fitness by w . d . hamilton hamilton , robert trivers , john maynard smith , and george r . price .
the three sociobiologies by scott , altmann and wilson have in common to place naturalist studies at the core of the research on animal social behavior .
in 1975 , wilson published his book " sociobiology : the new synthesis " .
since then " sociobiology " has largely been equated with wilson 's vision .
the book pioneered and popularized the attempt to explain the evolutionary mechanics behind social behaviors such as altruism , aggression , and nurturance .
however , the influence of evolution on behaviour has been of interest to biologists and philosophers since soon after the discovery of evolution itself .
peter kropotkin 's " " , written in the early 1890s , is a popular example .
wilson later wrote a pulitzer prize winning book , " on human nature " , that addressed human behavior specifically .
edward h . hagen writes in " the handbook of evolutionary psychology " that sociobiology is , despite the public controversy regarding the applications to humans , " one of the scientific triumphs of the twentieth century . "
it is a foundation of the work of almost all field biologists " sociobiological research on nonhuman organisms has increased dramatically and continuously in the world 's top scientific journals such as " nature " and " science " .
the more general term behavioral ecology is replaced for the term sociobiology in order to avoid the public controversy .
sociobiologists maintain that human behaviour , as well as nonhuman animal behaviour , can be partly explained as the outcome of natural selection .
they contend that in order to fully understand behavior , it must be analyzed in terms of evolutionary considerations .
natural selection is a fundamental part of evolutionary theory .
variants of hereditary traits which increase an organism 's ability to survive and reproduce will be much represented in later generations .
inherited behavioral mechanisms which allowed an organism a greater chance of surviving and / or reproducing in the past are more likely to survive in present organisms .
that inherited adaptive behaviour is present in nonhuman animal species .
however , some researchers say that evolutionary models are not the main driver of behavior .
the study of animals is based on nikolaas tinbergen 's four categories of questions and explanations of animal behaviour .
two categories are at the species level .
the species-level categories are often called " ultimate explanations " .
sociobiologists are interested in how behaviour can be explained logically as a result of selective pressures in the history of a species .
they are often interested in instinctive behaviour , and in explaining the similarities , rather than the differences between cultures .
for example , mothers within many species of mammals-including humans-are very protective of their offspring .
sociobiologists think that this protective behavior likely evolved over time because it helped the offspring of the individuals which had the characteristic to survive .
this parental protection will increase in frequency in the population .
the social behaviour is believed to have evolved in a fashion similar to other types of non-human adaptations , such as a coat of fur , or the sense of smell .
individual genetic advantage fails to explain certain social behaviors as a result of gene-centred selection .
e . o . wilson argued that evolution may also act upon groups .
the mechanisms responsible for group selection employ paradigms and population statistics borrowed from evolutionary game theory .
altruism is a concern for the welfare of others .
if altruism is genetically determined , then altruistic individuals must reproduce their own altruistic genetic traits for altruism to survive .
an example is a soldier losing his life trying to help a fellow soldier .
this example is a question of how altruistic genes can be passed on if this soldier dies without having any children .
in sociobiology , a social behavior is first explained as a sociobiological hypothesis by finding an evolutionarily stable strategy that matches the observed behavior .
it can predict gene frequencies .
the hypothesis can be supported by establishing a correlation between the gene frequencies predicted by the strategy , and those expressed in a population .
altruism between social insects and littermates has been explained in such a way .
altruistic behavior , behavior that increases the reproductive fitness of others at the apparent expense of the altruist , in some animals has been correlated to the degree of genome shared between altruistic individuals .
a quantitative description of infanticide by male harem-mating animals when the alpha male is displaced .
in general , females with more bearing opportunities may value offspring less .
an important idea in sociobiology is that temperament traits exist in an ecological balance .
just as an expansion of a sheep population might encourage the expansion of a wolf population , an expansion of altruistic traits within a gene pool may also encourage increasing numbers of individuals with dependent traits .
studies of human behavior genetics have generally found behavioral traits such as creativity , extroversion , aggressiveness , and iq have high heritability .
the researchers who carry out those studies are careful to point out that heritability does not constrain the influence that environmental or cultural factors may have on those traits .
criminality is being under study , but extremely controversial .
there are arguments that in some environments criminal behavior may be adaptive .
the novelist elias canetti also used sociobiological theory to cultural practices such as slavery and autocracy .
the genetic mouse mutants show the power that genes move on behaviour .
for example , the transcription factor fevstered aka pet1 ¥ , through its role in maintaining the serotonergic system in the brain , is required for normal aggressive and anxiety-like behavior .
thus , when fev is genetically deleted from the mouse genome , male mice will instantly attack other males , whereas their wild-type counterparts take significantly longer to initiate violent behaviour .
fev has also been shown to be necessary for correct maternal behaviour in mice .
a genetic basis for instinctive behavioural traits among non-human species is commonly accepted among many biologists .
steven pinker argues that critics have been overly swayed by politics and a fear of biological determinism .
he criticized both in his book " the mismeasure of man " .
noam chomsky has expressed views on sociobiology on several occasions .
chomsky argued for the importance of a sociobiologically informed notion of human nature .
chomsky argued that human beings are biological organisms and ought to be studied as such .
chomsky further hinted at the reconciliation of his anarchist political views and sociobiology in a discussion of peter kropotkin 's " " , which focused more on altruism than aggression .
wilson has said that he had never meant to mean what " ought " to be , only what " is " the case .
some critics have argued that the language of sociobiology readily slips from " to " ought " .
pinker argued that opposition to stances considered anti-social , such as ethnic nepotism , is based on moral assumptions .
the history of this debate , and others related to it , are covered in detail by , and .
