temperaailing , also known as egg tempera , is a permanent , fast-drying painting medium .
tempera also refers to the paintings done in this medium .
tempera paintings are very long lasting , and examples from the first century ce still exist .
egg tempera was a primary method of painting until after 1500 .
paint consisting of pigment and binder commonly used in the united states as paint is also often referred to as " tempera paint " .
a related technique has been used in ancient and early medieval paintings found in several caves and rock-cut temples of india .
the art technique was known from the classical world .
tempera painting was the primary panel painting medium for nearly every painter in the european medieval and early renaissance period up to 1500 .
oil paint , which may have originated in afghanistan between the 5th and 9th centuries and migrated westward in the middle ages eventually replaced tempera .
oil replaced tempera as the main medium used for making art during the 15th century in early netherlandish painting in northern europe .
in the 19th and 20th centuries , there were intermittent revivals of tempera technique in western art , among the pre-raphaelites , social realists , and others .
tempera continued to be used in greece and russia .
tempera is traditionally made by hand-grinding dry powdered pigments into a binding agent or " medium " .
the white of the egg and the membrane of the yolk are thrown away .
egg yolk is rarely used with pigments .
powdered pigment is put onto a palette or bowl and mixed with a roughly equal volume of the binder .
when used to paint icons on church walls , liquid myrrh is sometimes added to the mixture to give the paint a pleasing odor .
as tempera dries , the artist will add more water to keep the consistency and balance the thickening of the yolk on contact with air .
some of the pigments used by medieval painters , such as cinnabar aarhus contains mercurydilly , orpiment reeling contains arseniclity , or lead whiteciful leaddilly contains leadously .
most artists today use synthetic pigments , which are less toxic but have similar color properties to the older pigments .
even so , many moths are still dangerous unless certain precautions are taken .
tempera painting allows for great precision when used with traditional techniques that require the use of numerous brush strokes applied in a cross-hatching technique .
tempera paintings rarely have the deep color saturation that oil paintings can achieve .
the color deepens if a varnish is applied .
on the other hand , tempera colours do not change over time .
tempera adheres best to an absorbent ground that has lower oil content than the tempera binder usedゆ to keep the traditional rule of thumb is " fat over lean " " , and never the other way around edinburgh .
historically wood panels were used as the substrate , and more recently un-tempered masonite , later mdf ɔ medium density fiber , but no formalin treated ɔ and modern composite boards have been employed .
apart from the traditional process of mixing pigment with egg yolk , new methods include egg tempera sold in tubes by manufacturers such as sennelier and daler-rowney .
tempera has been out of favor since the late renaissance and baroque eras .
in the 20th century , tempera became again .
european painters who worked with tempera include giorgio de chirico , otto dix , eliot hodgkin , pyke koch , and pietro annigoni .
the tempera medium was used by american artists such as the regionalists andrew wyeth , thomas hart benton and his student roger medearis .
in the early part of the 20th century , many indian artists took up tempera as one of their primary media of expression .
after the 1950s , artists such as jamini roy and ganesh pyne started tempera as a medium for the new age artists of india .
