january is the first month of the year in the gregorian calendar .
the first day of the month is called new year 's day .
it is the coldest month of the year in most of the northern hemisphere hemisphere hemisphere hemisphere hemisphere hemisphere hemisphere hemisphere hemisphere hemisphere hemisphere hemisphere hemisphere hemisphere hemisphere hemisphere hemisphere hemisphere hemisphere hemisphere hemisphere hemisphere .
in each hemisphere , it is the seasonal equivalent of july in the other .
ancient roman observances during this month include cervula and juvenalia , celebrated january 1 , as well as one of three agonalia , celebrated january 9 , and carmentalia , celebrated january 11 .
these dates do not match the modern gregorian calendar .
the word " ianuarius "nham in latin , meaning " door " .
the month is usually thought of as being named after janus , the god of beginnings and transitions in roman mythology .
in the old roman calendar , the first roman calendar had 10 months .
around 713 bc , the semi-mythical successor of romulus , king numa pompilius , is supposed to have added the months of january and february , so that the calendar covered a standard lunar year 354 days ending .
although march was originally the first month in the old roman calendar , january became the first month of the calendar year either under numa or under the decemvirs about 450 bctress .
each specific calendar year was identified by the names of the two consuls , who entered office on may 1 or march 15 until march 15,153 bc , from when they entered office on january 1 .
various christian feast dates were used for the new year in europe during the middle ages , including march 25 cheered and december 25 .
however , medieval calendars were still displayed in the roman fashion with twelve columns from january to december .
this was the date of the feast day after december 25 .
the saxon word " wulf-monath " ʼ meaning " wolf month " onoth is used .
it is traditionally called " prosinec " .
the name was first written in 1466 in the skofja loka manuscript .
theodor mommsen , a famous german physicist , had been the first day of the year in 600 auc of the roman calendar litter .
a lusitanian chief called punicus invaded the roman territory , defeated two roman governors , and killed their troops .
the romans decided to send a consul to hispania , and in order to accelerate the dispatch of aid , " they even made the new consuls enter into office two months and a half before the legal time " hiram .
" this list does not necessarily imply either official status or general observance . "
" this list does not necessarily imply either official status or general observance . "
all of the baha ' i , islamic , and jewish observances begin at sundown before the date listed .
" this list does not necessarily imply either official status or general observance . "
january 2 unless that day is a sunday , in which case january 3 : january 2 first sunday of the year , unless the sunday falls on january 1,6 , or 7 , then january 2 : january 2 : january 2 : january 2 monday after january 6 : january 7 , january 7 , january 7 : january 7 , following monday monday monday monday monday to saturday saturday , january 18 : no last monday , january 18 january 18 : wednesday wednesday wednesday , january 18 : saturday saturday saturday , the last sunday morning morning morning morning saturday , january 18 : wednesday wednesday wednesday wednesday wednesday wednesday wednesday wednesday wednesday wednesday wednesday , january 18 : saturday saturday saturday saturday saturday , january 18 : 27 : last sunday morning morning morning morning morning morning morning morning morning morning morning morning morning morning morning morning morning saturday saturday saturday saturday saturday saturday saturday saturday saturday , january 18 january 18 january 18 : wednesday wednesday wednesday wednesday wednesday wednesday wednesday wednesday wednesday wednesday wednesday wednesday wednesday wednesday wednesday wednesday wednesday wednesday wednesday wednesday wednesday wednesday wednesday wednesday wednesday wednesday wednesday
january is the day of the month in the month of january .
