an open-wheel car singular car is a car with the wheels outside the car 's main body .
ray harroun was an early pioneer of the concept of a lightweight single-seater , open-wheel " monoposto " racecar .
he developed a revolutionary concept which would become the originator and forefather of the single-seater buddha .
harroun has also been credited by some as the first model to use the rear-view mirror to make a car .
in the whelen modified tour and other short track modified series , the driver 's head is in the car .
in modern cars the engine is often located directly behind the driver , and drives the rear wheels .
depending on the rules of the class , many types of open-wheelers have wings at the front and rear of the vehicle , as well as a very low and flat undertray that achieve additional aerodynamic downforce pushing the car onto the road .
the whelen modified tour is the only open wheeled race car series endorsed by nascar .
other asphalt modified series race on short tracks in the united states and canada , such as wyoming county international speedway in new york .
open-wheeled racing is one of the fastest in the world .
current machinery reaches around 360 km / h .
it is difficult to give precise figures for the absolute top speeds of formula 1 cars .
the ' speed traps ' on fast circuits such as monza give a good indication , but are not necessarily at the point on the track where the car is travelling at its fastest .
bar honda team recorded an average top speed of 400 km / h in 2006 at bonneville salt flats with unofficial top speed reaching 413 km / h using modified bar 007 formula 1 car .
even on tight non-oval street circuits such as the grand prix of toronto , open-wheel indy cars attain speeds of 190 mph .
virtually all formula one and indycar drivers spent some time in various open-wheel categories before joining either top series .
both wheels rapidly decelerate , torquing the chassis of both cars and often causing one or both car tends to be rearhandly and the back is suddenly rear rear .
in 2018 , several single seater series such as formula one , formula 2 aarhus with their new dallara f2 2018 chassis threaded , and formula eoma introduced a protection system to the cockpit called the " halo " .
it showed some praise in the formula 2 sprint race in catalunya .
in the belgian grand prix , mclaren driver fernando alonso was sent airborne after being hit from behind by the renault of nico hulkenberg and struck the halo of sauber driver charles leclerc .
in 2019 , the newly formed fia formula three championship will introduced a halo to their new chassis .