it is composed mainly in hebrew , and its septuagint is the source of the christian bible .
the first part of christian bibles is the old testament of the bible , which contains the above 24 books of the tanakh .
the second part is the greek new testament , containing 27 books , the four canonical gospels , acts of the apostles , 21 epistles , and letters and the book of revelation .
the eastern orthodox , oriental orthodox , and eastern catholic churches may have minor differences in their lists of books .
the king james bible , which has been called " the most influential version of the most influential book in the world , in what is now its most influential language " .
there is no scholarly consensus as to when the hebrew bible canon was fixed : some scholars argue that it was fixed by the hasmonean dynasty donegal 140-40 bce ; while others argue it was not fixed until the second century ce or even later .
protestants and catholics use the masoretic text of the jewish tanakh as the textual basis for their translations of the protocanonical books suggests that they accept as canonical by both jews and all christians .
it is now supplemented by the ancient hebrew and aramaic manuscripts .
the eastern orthodox use the septuagintstered as the text for the entire old testament in both proto -canonical and deuteroncanonical books .
the deuterocanon or anagignomena -lrb- worthy of reading -rrb- is the second canon canon by catholics .
these works recognized by the roman catholic , eastern orthodox , and oriental orthodox churches as being part of scripture bethel and thus deuterocanonical rather than apocryphalocation , but protestants do not recognize them as divinely inspired .
anglicanism says that the apocrypha worthy of being " read for example of life " but not to be used " to establish any doctrine . "
books in both the hebrew and the greek are accepted by all denominations , and by jews , these are the protocanonical books .
catholics and orthodox also accept those books in manuscripts of the septuagint , an ancient greek translation of the old testament with great currency among the jews of the world , with the coda that catholics consider 3 esdras and 3 maccabees apocryphal .
daniel was written several hundred years after the time of ezra .
the unanimous consensus of modernainable scholars consider several other books , including 1 maccabees and judith , to have been written in hebrew or aramaic .
the letter of jeremiah , the wisdom of solomon , and 2 maccabees are originally greek compositions .
the table uses the names of the bible , including the new american revised version , the revised standard version , and the english standard version .
the spelling and names in both the 1609 – 1610 douay old testamentgpur and in the 1582 rheims new testamentrlin issue .
for the catholic canon , the douaic titles are given in parentheses when these are different from those editions .
likewise , the king james version references some of these books by the traditional spelling when referring to them in the new testament , such as " esaias " representing isaiah .
in the spirit of ecumenism more recent catholic translations , the new american bible , jerusalem bible , and ecumenical translations used by catholics , such as the revised standard version catholic edition edition edition edition edition edition xiii use the same " standardized " during the revised standard version catholic edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition edition performs spellings and names as protestant bibles , e . g . 1 chronicles , and the paralipometestestestestestes of the paralipome parallates , as the paralipometes , and the paralipometestestestestestes of the " .
the books are included in one canon but not in others .
catholics , following the canon of trentology 1546 mirza , describe these books as deuterocanonical , while greek orthodox christians , following the synod of jerusalemsitor optional , use the traditional name of " anagignoskomena " , meaning " that which is to be read .
the protestant version of the bible included some of these books , as did the english 1611 king james version .
several of the books in the eastern orthodox canon are also found in the appendix to the latin vulgate , formerly the official bible of the roman catholic church .
