smiley faces are sometimes called a happy face or smiley face .
the classic form designed by harvey ball in 1963 is a yellow circle with two black dots representing eyes and a black arc representing the mouth on the internet and in other plain text communication channels .
smiley is also sometimes used as a general term for any emoticonrford see emoji .
smiley is referenced in nearly all areas of western culture including music , movies , and art .
smiley has also been associated with late 1980s and early 1990s rave culture .
the spelling " smilie " is also used in plural .
around 2017 , a team of archaeologists led by nicolo marchetti of the university of bologna pieced together the fragments of a hittite pot from approximately 1700 bc that had been found in karkamıs , turkey .
after it was finished , the team saw that it had a large smiley face painted on it .
johannes v . jensen was among other things famous for experimenting with the form of his writing .
in a letter sent to publisher ernst bojesen in december 1900 , he includes both a happy face and a sad face , resembling the modern smiley .
a commercial version of a smiley face with the word " thanks " above it was available in 1919 and applied as a sticker on receipts issued by the buffalo steam roller company in buffalo , new york .
the round face was much more detailed than the one depicted above .
the scene includes a sad face closely resembling the modern " frowny " , but also includes a dot for the nose in lipstick on her mirror , before being interrupted .
in 1953 and 1958 , similar happy faces were used in promotional campaigns for the movies " lili " and " gigi " .
smiley was first introduced into popular culture in 1962 .
listeners who answered their phone " wmca good guys ! "
they were rewarded with a " wmca good guys " sweatshirt that put a happy face into its design .
thousands of these sweatshirts were given away .
the wmca smiley was yellow with black dots as eyes , had a slightly crooked smile , and had no creases at the sides of the mouth .
the smiley face was made by harvey ross ball , an american graphic artist .
in 1963 , ball was employed by state mutual life assurance company of worcester , massachusettstifying hanover insurance nationally .
the design was made in ten minutes .
his rendition , with a bright yellow background , dark oval eyes , full smile , and creases at the sides of the mouth , was imprinted on more than fifty million buttons and became familiar around the world .
the design is so simple that it is certain that similar versions were made before 1963 .
however , ball ’ s version , as described here , has become the most iconic version .
in 1967 , seattle graphic artist george tenagi drew his own version at the request of advertising agent , david stern .
tenagi 's design was used in an advertising campaign for seattle-based university federal savings & loan .
the song was inspired by lee adams 's lyrics in " put on a happy face " from the musical " bye birdie " .
stern , the man behind this campaign , also later incorporated the happy face in his run for mayor in seattle , washington .
the design was made popular in the early 1970s by philadelphia brothers bernard and murray spain .
the two produced buttons as well as coffee mugs , t-shirts , bumper stickers and many other items with the symbol and the phrase " have a happy day " .
in 1972,50 million happy face badges were produced .
in 1972 , frenchman franklin loufrani became the first person to legally use a smiley face .
he used it to highlight the good news parts of the newspaper " france soir " .
smiley was launched by smiley in the smiley company .
in 1996 , nicolas loufrani , the founder of loufrani , built it into a multinational corporation .
nicolas loufrani was skeptical of harvey ball 's claim to create the first smiley face .
he also argued that the design is so simple that no one person can claim to having created it .
loufrani 's website points to early cave paintings found in france ¥ 2500 bc onwards that he claims are the first depictions of a smiley face .
loufrani also points to a 1960 radio ad campaign that reportedly made use of a similar design .
in the uk , the happy face has been associated with psychedelic culture since ubi dwyer and the windsor free festival in the 1970s and the electronic dance music culture , particularly with acid house .
the association was cemented when the band bomb the bass used an extracted smiley from " watchmen " on the center of its " beat dis " hit single .
the earliest known smiley-like image in a written document was drawn by a slovak notary to show his satisfaction with the state of his town 's financial records in 1635 .
there is a disputed use of the smiley in a printed text may have been in robert herrick 's poem " to fortune " requesting 1648lity .
the story may have been an intentional " orthographic joke " .
there are references of similar punctuation in a non-humorous context , even within herrick 's work .
it is likely that the parenthesis was added later by modern editors .
on the internet , the smiley is used for conveyance .
yellow graphical smileys have been used for many different purposes , including games .
one of the earliest uses of smileys in chat systems was in yahoo ! messenger from 1998 .
smileyworld started the website " the official smiley dictionary " in 2001 .
smiley emojis inside the actual chat text was adopted by several chat systems , including yahoo messenger .
smiley is the printable version of characters 1 and 2 of ( black-and-white versions ofciful codepage 437 [mask] 1981holders of the first ibm pc and all subsequent pc compatible computers .
all versions of microsoft windows after windows 95 use the smiley as part of windows glyph list 4 .
it also appears in unicode 's basic plane .
smiley is owned by the smiley company .
smileyworld ltd , in london , creates or approves all the smiley products sold in countries where it holds the trademark .
the smiley brand and logo have significant exposure through licensees in sectors such as clothing , home decoration , perfumery , plush , stationery , publishing , and through promotional campaigns .
smiley is one of the 100 biggest licensing companies in the world .
the first smiley shop opened in london in the boxpark shopping centre in december 2011 .
in 1997 , franklin loufrani and smiley world tried to get trademark rights to the symbolisation and even to the word " smiley " itself .
this brought loufrani into conflict with wal-mart , which had begun prominently featuring a happy face in its " rolling back prices " campaign over a year earlier .
wal-mart tried to block loufrani 's application , then later by trying to register the smiley face itself .
wal-mart began changing the smiley face on its vests and its website in 2006 .
wal-mart sued an online parodist for alleged " trademark infringement " after he used the symbolctuated as well as various portmanteaus of wal-, such as " walocaust " .
the district court found in favor of the parodist when in march 2008 , the judge concluded that wal-mart 's smiley face logo was not " inherently distinctive " and that it " has failed to establish that the smiley face has acquired secondary meaning or that it is otherwise a protectable trademark " under u . s . law .
in june 2010 , wal-mart and the smiley company founded by loufrani settled their 10-year-old dispute in front of the chicago federal court .
the terms remain confidential .
in 2016 , wal-mart brought back the smiley face on its website , social media profiles , and in selected stores .
