the narrator tells us that from an early age he has loved animals ; he and his wife have many pets .
when he tries to seize it , the panicked cat bites the narrator .
but this feeling soon gave place to irritation .
and then came , as if to my final and irrevocable overthrow , the spirit of perverseness . "
the next day , the narrator returns to the ruins of his home to find the single wall that survived the fire .
at first , this image deeply disturbs the narrator , but gradually he determines a logical explanation for it ; someone outside had cut the cat from the tree and thrown its corpse into the bedroom to wake him during the fire .
the narrator begins to miss pluto and hate himself .
later , he finds a similar cat in a tavern .
it is the same size and color as the original and is even missing an eye .
the only difference is a large white patch on the animal 's chest .
the narrator takes it home , but soon begins to fear and loathe the creature .
this terrifies and angers him more , and he avoids the cat whenever possible .
one day , the narrator and his wife are visiting the cellar in their new home .
the man grabs an axe and tries to kill the cat .
to hide her body he removes bricks from a hole in the wall .
a few days later , when the police come to the house to investigate the wife 's disappearance , they find nothing and the narrator goes free .
then , completely confident in his own safety , the narrator comments on the sturdiness of the building and raps upon the wall he had built around his wife 's body .
sitting on the corpse 's rotting head , to the utter horror of the narrator , is the screeching black cat .
like the narrator in poe 's " the tell-tale heart " , the narrator of " the black cat " has questionable sanity .
in the beginning of the story , the narrator says that the reader would be " mad indeed " if the reader should expect a reader to believe the story , implying that he has already been accused of madness .
the extent to which the narrator claims to have loved his animals suggests mental instability in the form of having “ too much of a good thing ” .
his partiality for animals substitutes “ the paltry friendship and gossamer fidelity of mere man ” .
he thinks of her as another pet , seeing as he distrusts and dislikes humans .
one of poe 's darkest tales , " the black cat " includes his strongest denunciation of alcohol .
the narrator 's perverse actions are brought on by his alcoholism , a " disease " and " fiend " which also destroys his personality .
the black cat is used in disguise as the narrator 's wife says they are all witches in disguise .
in his " instinct vs reason-a black cat " he said : " the writer of this article is the owner of one of the most remarkable black cats in the world-and this is saying much ; for it will be remembered that black cats are all of them witches . "
the cat in the poem is named pluto after the roman god of the underworld .
although pluto is a neutral character at the beginning of the story , he becomes antagonistic in the narrator 's eyes when the narrator becomes an alcoholic .
the alcohol pushes the narrator into fits of anger and violence .
when the narrator cuts pluto 's eye from its socket , this can be seen as symbolic of self-inflicted partial blindness to his own vision of moral goodness .
the only remainder is the impression of pluto upon the wall , which shows his unforgivable and incorrigible sin .