" the black cat " is a short story by edgar allen poe .
it was first published in august 1843 .
it is a study of guilt .
in both , a murderer carefully conceals his crime and believes himself unassable , but eventually breaks down and reveals himself , impelled by a nagging reminder of his guilt .
the story is told in a first-person narrative using an unreliable narrator .
he is a condemned man .
the narrator tells us that from an early age he has loved animals ; he and his wife have many pets .
this cat likes the narrator and vice versa .
their friendship lasts for several years until the narrator becomes an alcoholic .
one night , after coming home completely intoxicated , he believes the cat to be avoiding him .
when he tries to seize it , the panicked cat bites the narrator .
the cat runs in terror at his master 's approach .
at first , the narrator is sad and regrets his cruelty .
" but this feeling soon gave place to irritation .
and then came , as if to my final and irrevocable overthrow , the spirit of perverseness . "
in another fit of drunken fury , the narrator takes the cat out in the garden one morning and ties a noose around its neck , hanging it from a tree where it dies .
that very night his house mysteriously catches fire .
the next day , the narrator returns to the ruins of his home to find the single wall that survived the fire .
at first , this image deeply disturbs the narrator , but gradually he determines a logical explanation for it ; someone outside had cut the cat from the tree and thrown its corpse into the bedroom to wake him during the fire .
the narrator begins to miss pluto and hate himself .
later , he finds a similar cat in a tavern .
it is the same size and color as the original and is even missing an eye .
the only difference is a large white patch on the animal 's chest .
the narrator takes it home , but soon begins to fear and loathe the creature .
after a time , the white patch of fur begins to take shape .
this terrifies and angers him more , and he avoids the cat whenever possible .
one day , the narrator and his wife are visiting the cellar in their new home .
the man grabs an axe and tries to kill the cat .
he accidentally kills his wife instead .
to hide her body he removes bricks from a hole in the wall .
a few days later , when the police come to the house to investigate the wife 's disappearance , they find nothing and the narrator goes free .
the cat , which he intended to kill as well , has also gone missing .
this gives him the freedom to sleep , even with the burden of murder .
the narrator goes with the police into the cellar .
they still find nothing significant .
then , completely confident in his own safety , the narrator comments on the sturdiness of the building and raps upon the wall he had built around his wife 's body .
loud , loud , loud loud loud loud loud loud loud loud , loud loud loud loud loud loud loud loud loud loud loud loud sound fills the room .
the police attack the wall and find the corpse .
sitting on the corpse 's rotting head , to the utter horror of the narrator , is the screeching black cat .
the terrified narrator is completely shattered by this reminder of his crime , which he had believed to be safe from discovery , and the appearance of the cat .
as he says , " i had walled the monster up within the tomb ! "
it was first published in august 1843 .
at the time , the publication was using the temporary title " united states saturday post " .
readers immediately responded positively to the story .
like the narrator in poe 's " the tell-tale heart " , the narrator of " the black cat " has questionable sanity .
in the beginning of the story , the narrator says that the reader would be " mad indeed " if the reader should expect a reader to believe the story , implying that he has already been accused of madness .
the extent to which the narrator claims to have loved his animals suggests mental instability in the form of having “ too much of a good thing ” .
his partiality for animals substitutes “ the paltry friendship and gossamer fidelity of mere man ” .
he thinks of her as another pet , seeing as he distrusts and dislikes humans .
he did not understand his excessive love of animals .
one of poe 's darkest tales , " the black cat " includes his strongest denunciation of alcohol .
the narrator 's perverse actions are brought on by his alcoholism , a " disease " and " fiend " which also destroys his personality .
the black cat is used in disguise as the narrator 's wife says they are all witches in disguise .
poe had a black cat .
in his " instinct vs reason-a black cat " he said : " the writer of this article is the owner of one of the most remarkable black cats in the world-and this is saying much ; for it will be remembered that black cats are all of them witches . "
in scottish and irish mythology , the cat sith is described as being a black cat with a white spot on its chest .
the cat in the poem is named pluto after the roman god of the underworld .
although pluto is a neutral character at the beginning of the story , he becomes antagonistic in the narrator 's eyes when the narrator becomes an alcoholic .
the alcohol pushes the narrator into fits of anger and violence .
when the narrator cuts pluto 's eye from its socket , this can be seen as symbolic of self-inflicted partial blindness to his own vision of moral goodness .
the fire that destroys the narrator 's house symbolizes the narrator 's " almost complete moral disintegration " .
the only remainder is the impression of pluto upon the wall , which shows his unforgivable and incorrigible sin .
from a rhetorician 's standpoint , an effective scheme of omission that poe uses is diazeugma , or using many verbs for one subject ; it omits pronouns .
diazeugma emphasizes actions and makes the narrative swift and brief .
