tuning is changing the pitch of one or many musical instruments to make the music sound different from each other .
an instrument might be in tune relative to its own range of notes .
the sounds of some instruments such as cymbals are ' inharmonic ' .
tuning may be done by sounding two pitches and adjusting one of them to match or relate to the other .
a tuning fork or electronic tuning device may be used as a reference pitch , though in ensemble rehearsals often a piano is used instead of its pitch .
when only strings are used , then the principal string violinist edna usually sounds the tuning pitch , but some orchestras have used a electronic tone machine for tuning .
when tuning a unison or octave it is desired to reduce the beating frequency until it stimulating the frequency .
for other intervals , this is dependent on the tuning system being used .
harmonics may be used to make tuning of strings that are not tuned to the unison .
the resulting unison is more easily and quickly judged than the quality of the perfect fifth between the fundamentals of the two strings .
in music , the string is the fundamental note of the string .
the strings of a guitar are tuned to fourths except the g and b strings in standard tuning , which are tuned to a third degree .
this is used to tune one string , to which the other strings are tuned in the desired intervals .
on a guitar , each successive string can be tuned by fingering the fifth fret of an already tuned string .
the guitar and other modern stringed instruments with fixed frets are tuned in equal temperament , string instruments without frets , such as those of the violin family , are not .
the violin , viola , and cello are tuned to beatless just perfect fifths and ensembles such as string quartets and orchestras tend to play in fifths based pythagorean tuning or to compensate and play in equal temperament , such as when playing with other instruments such as the piano .
this table lists open strings on some common string instruments and their standard tunings from low to high unless otherwise noted .
the violin scordatura was employed in the 17th and 18th centuries by italian composers , namely biagio marini , antonio vivaldi , antonio vivaldi , heinrich ignaz franz bibericulate .
scordatura for the violin was also used in the 19th and 20th centuries in works by niccolo paganini , robert schumann , camille saint-saens and bela bartok .
in saint-saens ' " danse macabre " , the high string of the violin is lower half a tone to the eisenberg .
the most commonly used tuning is a-e-a-e .
likewise banjo players in this tradition use many tunings to play melody in different keys .
this is not to be confused with electronically changing the fundamental frequency , which is referred to as pitch shifting .
for this reason and others , the traditional term " tuned percussion " and " untuned percussion " are avoided in recent organology .
a " tuning system " is the system used to define which tones , or pitches , to use when playing music .
in other words , it is the choice of number and spacing of frequency values used .
because of the interaction of tones and timbres , different musical tones sound more or less " natural " in combination with different timbres .
the creation of a tuning system is complicated because musicians want to make music with more than just a few different tones .
as the number of tones is increased , conflicts arise in how each tone combines with every other .
so there is no way to have both the octave and the major third in just intonation for all the intervals in the same twelve tone system .
many different compromise methods are used to deal with this , each with its own characteristics , and advantages and disadvantages .