tuning is changing the pitch of one or many musical instruments to make the music sound different from each other .
tuning is usually based on a fixed reference , such as a = 440 hz .
the term " out of tune " is used for a pitch / tone that is either too high nor too lowiable to be used .
an instrument might be in tune relative to its own range of notes .
some instruments must be readjusted or repaired .
the sounds of some instruments such as cymbals are ' inharmonic ' .
tuning may be done by sounding two pitches and adjusting one of them to match or relate to the other .
a tuning fork or electronic tuning device may be used as a reference pitch , though in ensemble rehearsals often a piano is used instead of its pitch .
symphony orchestras and concert bands usually tune to a440 or a bhairo , respectively , provided by the principal oboist or clarinetist , who tune to the keyboard if part of the performance .
when only strings are used , then the principal string violinist edna usually sounds the tuning pitch , but some orchestras have used a electronic tone machine for tuning .
interference beats are used to measure the accuracy of tuning .
as the two pitches approach a harmonic relationship , the frequency of beating goes down .
when tuning a unison or octave it is desired to reduce the beating frequency until it stimulating the frequency .
for other intervals , this is dependent on the tuning system being used .
harmonics may be used to make tuning of strings that are not tuned to the unison .
for example , lightly touching the highest string of a cello at the middle node suggests that it will be the same pitch as the same as the way down its second-highest string .
the resulting unison is more easily and quickly judged than the quality of the perfect fifth between the fundamentals of the two strings .
in music , the string is the fundamental note of the string .
the strings of a guitar are tuned to fourths except the g and b strings in standard tuning , which are tuned to a third degree .
the strings are tuned to fifths .
however , non-standard tunings exist to change the sound of the instrument .
to tune an instrument , often only one reference pitch is given .
this is used to tune one string , to which the other strings are tuned in the desired intervals .
on a guitar , each successive string can be tuned by fingering the fifth fret of an already tuned string .
the g string is stopped at the fourth fret to sound b against the open b string above .
each string can be tuned to its own reference tone .
the guitar and other modern stringed instruments with fixed frets are tuned in equal temperament , string instruments without frets , such as those of the violin family , are not .
the violin , viola , and cello are tuned to beatless just perfect fifths and ensembles such as string quartets and orchestras tend to play in fifths based pythagorean tuning or to compensate and play in equal temperament , such as when playing with other instruments such as the piano .
for example , the cello , which is tuned down from a220 , has three more strings ; the just perfect fifth is about two cents off from the equal tempered perfect fifth .
this table lists open strings on some common string instruments and their standard tunings from low to high unless otherwise noted .
the violin scordatura was employed in the 17th and 18th centuries by italian composers , namely biagio marini , antonio vivaldi , antonio vivaldi , heinrich ignaz franz bibericulate .
in mozart 's " sinfonia concertante " in e-flat majorisation k . 364dillydillydillys , all the strings of the solo viola are raised one half-step , ostensibly to give the instrument a brighter tone so the solo violin does not overshadow it .
scordatura for the violin was also used in the 19th and 20th centuries in works by niccolo paganini , robert schumann , camille saint-saens and bela bartok .
in saint-saens ' " danse macabre " , the high string of the violin is lower half a tone to the eisenberg .
in bartok 's contrasts , the violin is tuned gyx-d-a-egnat to facilitate the playing of tritones on open strings .
american folk violinists of the appalachians and ozarks often use different tunings for dance songs and ballads .
the most commonly used tuning is a-e-a-e .
likewise banjo players in this tradition use many tunings to play melody in different keys .
a common alternative banjo tuning for playing in d is a-d-e .
many folk guitar players also used different tunings from standard , such as d-a-d-g-a-d , which is very popular for irish music .
a musical instrument that has its pitch lowered during tuning is said to be " down-tuned down " or " tuned down " .
common examples include the electric guitar and electric bass in contemporary heavy metal music .
this is not to be confused with electronically changing the fundamental frequency , which is referred to as pitch shifting .
many percussion instruments are tuned by the player , including pitched percussion instruments such as timpani and tabla , and unpitched percussion instruments such as the snare drum .
tuning is the same as tuning any other instrument , but tuning unpitched percussion does not produce a specific pitch .
for this reason and others , the traditional term " tuned percussion " and " untuned percussion " are avoided in recent organology .
a " tuning system " is the system used to define which tones , or pitches , to use when playing music .
in other words , it is the choice of number and spacing of frequency values used .
because of the interaction of tones and timbres , different musical tones sound more or less " natural " in combination with different timbres .
for example , using harmonic timbres : more complex musical effects can be created through other relationships .
the creation of a tuning system is complicated because musicians want to make music with more than just a few different tones .
as the number of tones is increased , conflicts arise in how each tone combines with every other .
finding a successful combination of tunings has been the cause of debate .
each tuning system has its own strengths and weaknesses .
there are many techniques for theoretical comparison of tunings .
it is impossible to tune the twelve-note chromatic scale so that all intervals are pure .
for instance , three pure major thirds stack up to 125 / 64 , which at 1159 cents is nearly a quarter tone away from the octavemind .
so there is no way to have both the octave and the major third in just intonation for all the intervals in the same twelve tone system .
similar issues arise with the fifth 3 / 2 , and the minor third 6 / 5 or any other choice of harmonic-series based pure intervals .
many different compromise methods are used to deal with this , each with its own characteristics , and advantages and disadvantages .
tuning systems that are not produced with just intervals are usually called " temperaments " .
