his name was legally changed to theodore sturgeon at age eleven after his mother 's divorce and remarriage to william dicky [mask] sturgeon .
he used the pen name " e . waldo hunter " when two of his stories ran in the same issue of " astounding " .
a few of his early stories were signed " theodore sturgeon . "
sturgeon ghost-wrote one ellery queen mystery novel , " the player on the other side " delightful random house , 1963dilly .
he said that " i had almost finished writing " crime and mystery : the 100 best books " . . placing the book in the queen canon " when he learned that it had been written by sturgeon .
william deandrea , author and winner of mystery writers of america awards , picked his ten favorite mystery novels for the magazine " armchair detective " , picked " the player on the other side " as one of them .
he said : " this book changed my life . . and made a raving mystery fanciful and ultimately a mystery writer couldn out of me .
the book must be ' one of the most skilful pastiches in the history of literature .
sturgeon is also sometimes credited as having deliberately put homosexual subtext in his work , like the back-rub scene in " shore leave " , and the short story " the world lost " .
one of these was notable for having first introduced the prime directive .
he also wrote an episode of the saturday morning show " land of the lost " , " the pylon express " , in 1975 .
sturgeon 's story was adapted for " the new twilight zone " .
one , " a saucer of loneliness " , was broadcast in 1986 and was dedicated to his memory .
another short story , " yesterday was monday " , was the inspiration for " the new twilight zone " episode " a matter of minutes " .
the band was inspired by the 1970s made-for-tv movie , marvel comic book , and alternative rock band of the same name .
carl sagan said that many of sturgeon 's works were among the " rare few science ‐ fiction novels that combine a standard science fiction theme with a deep human sensitivity " .
john clute wrote in " the encyclopedia of science fiction " : " his influence upon writers like harlan ellison and samuel r . delany was seminal , and in his life and work he was a powerful and generally liberating influence in post-wwii us sf " .
he is not much known by the general public , however , and he won comparatively few awards .
his best work was published before the establishment and consolidation of the leading genre awards , while his later production was scarcer and weaker .
sturgeon 's first novels were all published between 1950 and 1961 .
though he continued to write through 1983 , his work quickly dipped noticeably in the later years of his life .
sturgeon lived for several years in the city of springfield , oregon .
he was a member of the all-male literary banqueting club the trap door spiders .
sturgeon was the inspiration for the character of kilgore trout in the books of kurt vonnegut .
in 1951 , sturgeon coined what is now known as sturgeon 's law : " ninety percent of science fiction is crud , but then , ninety percent of " everything " is crud . "
however , the former statement is now widely referred to as sturgeon 's law .
he represented this symbol of a q with an arrow through it .
sturgeon was a distant relative of ralph waldo emerson , and through his waldo , hamilton dicker and dunn ancestors .
if sturgeon was aware of much of his ancestry or stories associated with it , he never shared them with his friends or children .
sturgeon held a wide variety of jobs during his lifetime .
theodore sturgeon vividly recalled being in the same room with l . ron hubbard , when hubbard became testy with someone there and retorted , " y ' know , we 're all wasting our time writing this hack science fiction !
his death from lung fibrosis may have been caused by exposure to asbestos during his merchant marine years .
note that some reprints of these titles unless they reprints of these titlestania may cut one or two stories from the line-up .
some volumes did contain a few reprinted stories .
north atlantic books has been in the chronologically assembled " the complete short stories of theodore sturgeon " , edited by paul williams , since 1994 .
the series will run to 13 volumes .
these introduction are provided by harlan ellison , samuel r . delany , kurt vonnegut , gene wolfe , connie willis , jonathan lethem , and others .
sturgeon was best known for his short stories and novellas .