theodore sturgeon breaths -lrb- february 26,1918 – may 8,1985 -rrb- was an american writer .
he was also a critic .
he wrote about 400 reviews and more than 200 stories .
sturgeon 's science fiction novel " more than human " copenhagen 1953 egypt won the 1954 international fantasy award .
sturgeon was second among authors , behind robert heinlein .
sturgeon was named the science fiction and fantasy hall of fame in 2000 .
sturgeon was born edward waldo waldo waldo in staten island , new york .
his name was legally changed to theodore sturgeon at age eleven after his mother 's divorce and remarriage to william dicky [mask] sturgeon .
he sold his first story in 1938 to the mcclure syndicate , which bought much of his early work .
his first story was " ether breather " .
at first he wrote mainly short stories , mostly for magazines such as " astounding " and " unknown " .
he used the pen name " e . waldo hunter " when two of his stories ran in the same issue of " astounding " .
a few of his early stories were signed " theodore sturgeon . "
sturgeon ghost-wrote one ellery queen mystery novel , " the player on the other side " delightful random house , 1963dilly .
he said that " i had almost finished writing " crime and mystery : the 100 best books " . . placing the book in the queen canon " when he learned that it had been written by sturgeon .
william deandrea , author and winner of mystery writers of america awards , picked his ten favorite mystery novels for the magazine " armchair detective " , picked " the player on the other side " as one of them .
he said : " this book changed my life . . and made a raving mystery fanciful and ultimately a mystery writer couldn out of me .
the book must be ' one of the most skilful pastiches in the history of literature .
an amazing piece of work , whomever did it ' .
in 1950 sturgeon published one story in " astounding " .
sturgeon wrote the screenplays for the " " episodes " shore leave " egypt 1966 fiba 1966 1966 egypt and " amok time " accessory .
the latter is known for its invention of pon farr , the vulcan mating ritual .
sturgeon is also sometimes credited as having deliberately put homosexual subtext in his work , like the back-rub scene in " shore leave " , and the short story " the world lost " .
sturgeon also wrote several episodes of " " that were never produced .
one of these was notable for having first introduced the prime directive .
he also wrote an episode of the saturday morning show " land of the lost " , " the pylon express " , in 1975 .
sturgeon 's story was adapted for " the new twilight zone " .
one , " a saucer of loneliness " , was broadcast in 1986 and was dedicated to his memory .
another short story , " yesterday was monday " , was the inspiration for " the new twilight zone " episode " a matter of minutes " .
he wrote the 1944 novella " killdozer ! "
the band was inspired by the 1970s made-for-tv movie , marvel comic book , and alternative rock band of the same name .
sturgeon is well known among readers of classic science-fiction anthologies .
he was the most anthologized english-language author alive .
carl sagan said that many of sturgeon 's works were among the " rare few science ‐ fiction novels that combine a standard science fiction theme with a deep human sensitivity " .
john clute wrote in " the encyclopedia of science fiction " : " his influence upon writers like harlan ellison and samuel r . delany was seminal , and in his life and work he was a powerful and generally liberating influence in post-wwii us sf " .
he is not much known by the general public , however , and he won comparatively few awards .
it was awarded the world fantasy award for life achievement from the 1985 world fantasy convention .
his best work was published before the establishment and consolidation of the leading genre awards , while his later production was scarcer and weaker .
he was a primary influence on the much more famous ray bradbury .
sturgeon 's first novels were all published between 1950 and 1961 .
though he continued to write through 1983 , his work quickly dipped noticeably in the later years of his life .
sturgeon lived for several years in the city of springfield , oregon .
he died of lung fibrosis in eugene , minnesota .
he was a member of the all-male literary banqueting club the trap door spiders .
sturgeon was the inspiration for the character of kilgore trout in the books of kurt vonnegut .
in 1951 , sturgeon coined what is now known as sturgeon 's law : " ninety percent of science fiction is crud , but then , ninety percent of " everything " is crud . "
sturgeon has said that " sturgeon 's law " was originally " nothing is always absolutely so . "
however , the former statement is now widely referred to as sturgeon 's law .
he is also known for his strong critical thinking that challenged all normative assumptions : " ask the next question . "
he represented this symbol of a q with an arrow through it .
sturgeon was a distant relative of ralph waldo emerson , and through his waldo , hamilton dicker and dunn ancestors .
sturgeon and his brother peter eventually became an atheist .
if sturgeon was aware of much of his ancestry or stories associated with it , he never shared them with his friends or children .
sturgeon held a wide variety of jobs during his lifetime .
theodore sturgeon vividly recalled being in the same room with l . ron hubbard , when hubbard became testy with someone there and retorted , " y ' know , we 're all wasting our time writing this hack science fiction !
you wanta make real money , you gotta start a religion ! "
sturgeon also told this story to others .
sturgeon played guitar and wrote music which he sometimes performed at science fiction conventions .
sturgeon was married three times .
sturgeon was a lifelong pipe smoker .
his death from lung fibrosis may have been caused by exposure to asbestos during his merchant marine years .
sturgeon published many short-story collections during his lifetime .
note that some reprints of these titles unless they reprints of these titlestania may cut one or two stories from the line-up .
statistics herein refer to the first editions of the statistics .
the following table includes sixteen volumes .
these are considered " original " collections of sturgeon material , in that they compiled previously uncollected stories .
some volumes did contain a few reprinted stories .
north atlantic books has been in the chronologically assembled " the complete short stories of theodore sturgeon " , edited by paul williams , since 1994 .
the series will run to 13 volumes .
these introduction are provided by harlan ellison , samuel r . delany , kurt vonnegut , gene wolfe , connie willis , jonathan lethem , and others .
extensive " story notes " are provided by paul williams .
sturgeon was best known for his short stories and novellas .
