romantic music is a type of music in the romantic period .
romanticism is the intellectual , artistic and literary movement that became prominent in western europe from approximately 1800 until 1850 .
romantic composers sought to create music that was individualistic , emotional , dramatic and often programmatic .
romantic music was often ostensibly inspired bykovsky or else sought to evokeokeoke complement non-musical stimuli , such as nature , literature , poetry or the plastic arts .
later , the 19th century composers would seem to be able to build upon certain early romantic ideas and musical techniques , such as the use of extended chromatic harmony and orchestration .
the romantic movement was an artistic , literary , and intellectual movement .
it was influenced by developments in natural history .
the french used the word " memoires " in 1789 .
in 1813 , he wrote about beethoven ’ s music .
it was hoffmann 's fusion of ideas already associated with the term " romantic " , used in opposition to the restraint and formality of classical models , that elevated music , and especially instrumental music , to a position of pre-eminence in romanticism as the art most suited to the expression of emotions .
these lists , however , proliferated over time , resulted in a " chaos of antithetical phenomena " , criticized for their superficiality and signifying so many different things that there came to be no central meaning .
in music there is a clear dividing line in musical structure and form following the death of beethoven .
whether one counts beethoven as a “ romantic ” composer or not , the breadth and power of his work gave rise to a feeling that the classical sonata form and , indeed , the structure of the symphony , sonata and string quartet had been exhausted .
for example , the industrial revolution was in full effect by the late 18th century and early 19th century .
this event had a big effect on music : there were major improvements in the mechanical valves and keys that most woodwinds and brass instruments depend on .
they often wrote for public concerts and festivals .
for example , jean sibelius ' " finlandia " represents the rising nation of finland .
joseph machlis states , " poland 's struggle for freedom from tsarist rule aroused the national poet in poland .
during world war ii the nazis forbade the playing of . . chopin 's polonaises in warsaw because of the powerful symbolism in these works .
other composers , such as bedrich smetana , wrote pieces that musically described their homelands .
smetana also composed eight nationalist operas , all of which remain in the repertory .
he was the first czech nationalist composer and the most important czech opera composer of the generation who came to prominence in the 1860s .
