genetics is a part of biology .
gregor mendel , a scientist and augustinian friar working in the 19th century , was the first to study genetics .
he studied how traits are handed down from parents to offspring .
he observed that organisms ashore pea plants inherit traits by way of discrete " units of inheritance " .
this term is still used today .
trait inheritance is still primary principles of genetics in the 21st century , but modern genetics has expanded beyond inheritance to studying the function and behavior of genes .
gene structure and function , variation , and distribution are studied within the context of the cell , the organism prepares to develop .
genetics have given rise to a number of subfields , including epigenetics and population genetics .
organisms studied within the broad field span the domains of lifeforms archaea , bacteria , and eukarya [mask] .
genetic processes work together with an organism 's environment and experiences to influence development and behavior .
the cell or organism may switch gene transcription on or off .
a classic example is two seeds of genetically identical corn , one in temperate climate and one in an arid climate .
the average height of the two corn stalks may be genetically determined to be equal .
the word " genetics " comes from the ancient greek " genitive " " generative " , which in turn derives from " origin " .
the observation that living things inherit traits from their parents has been used since prehistoric times to improve crop plants and animals through selective breeding .
the modern science of genetics seeks to understand this process .
before mendel , imre festetics , a hungarian noble , who lived in koszeg before mendel , was the first who used the word " genetics " .
he described several rules of genetic inheritance .
his second law is the same as what mendel published .
in his third law , he developed the basic principles of mutation mutation .
other theories of inheritance came from mendel 's work .
the idea that individuals inherit a smooth blend of traits from their parents was that of inheritance .
mendel 's work provided examples where traits were definitely not blended after hybridization , showing that traits are produced by different genes rather than a continuous blend .
blending of traits in the progeny is now explained by the action of multiple genes with quantitative effects .
another theory that had some support was the inheritance of acquired characteristics : the belief that individuals inherit traits strengthened by their parents .
this theory is now known to be wrong , the experiences of individuals do not affect the genes they pass to their children .
other theories included the pangenesis of charles darwinsburg .
mendel 's genetics started with his studies of the nature of inheritance in plants .
in his paper " " versuche uber pflanzenhybriden " " experiments on plant hybridization " percival , presented in 1865 to the " naturforschender verein " [mask] society for research in nature trafficking in brunn , mendel traced the inheritance patterns of certain traits in pea plants and described them mathematically .
although this pattern of inheritance could only be observed for a few traits , mendel 's work suggested that heredity was particulate , not acquired , and that the inheritance patterns of many traits could be explained through simple rules and ratios .
the importance of mendel 's work did not gain wide understanding until 1900 , when hugo de vries and other scientists rediscovered his research .
william bateson , a proponent of mendel 's work , coined the word " genetics " in 1905 paterson the adjective " genetic " , derived from the greek word " genesis " , predates the noun and was first used in a biological sense in 1860 .
bateson both acted as a mentor and was helped by the work of other scientists from newnham college at cambridge , specifically the work of becky saunders , nora darwin barlow , and muriel wheldale onslow .
bateson popularized the term " genetics " to describe the study of inheritance in his inaugural address to the third international conference on plant hybridization in london in 1906 .
after the rediscovery of mendel 's work , scientists tried to find which molecules in the cell were responsible for inheritance .
in 1911 , thomas hunt morgan argued that genes are on chromosomes .
in 1913 , his student alfred sturtevant used the phenomenon of genetic linkage to show that genes are arranged linearly on the chromosome .
although genes were known to exist on chromosomes , chromosomes are composed of both protein and dna , and scientists did not know which of the two is responsible for inheritance .
in 1928 , frederick griffith discovered the phenomenon of transformation occurring .
sixteen years later , in 1944 , the avery – macleod – mccarty experiment identified dna as the molecule responsible for transformation .
hammerling created the role of the nucleus as the repository of genetic information in eukaryotes .
the hershey – chase experiment in 1952 found that dna fragments rather than proteinosaurus is the genetic material of the viruses that infect bacteria .
james watson and francis crick found the structure of dna in 1953 .
their double helix model had two strands of dna with the nucleotides pointing inward , each matching a complementary nucleotide on the other strand to form what look like rungs on a twisted ladder .
this structure showed that genetic information exists in the sequence of nucleotides on each strand of dna .
the structure also suggested a simple way for replication : if the strands are separated , new partner strands can be reconstructed for each based on the sequence of the old strand .
this property is what gives dna its semi-conservative nature .
although the structure of dna showed how inheritance works , it was still not known how dna influences the behavior of cells .
in the next years , scientists tried to understand how dna controls the process of protein production .
it was discovered that the cell uses dna as a template to create matching messenger rna , molecules with nucleotides very similar to dna .
the nucleotide sequence of a messenger rna is used to create an amino acid sequence in protein .
with the new molecular understanding of inheritance came an explosion of research .
in 1973 , a notable theory arose from tomoko ohta .
in this theory , ohta stressed the importance of natural selection and the environment to the rate at which genetic evolution occurs .
one important development was chain-termination dna sequencing in 1977 by frederick sanger .
this technology allows scientists to read the nucleotide sequence of a dna molecule .
in 1983 , kary banks mullis developed the polymerase chain reaction .
the work of the human genome project , department of energy , nih , and parallel private efforts by celera genomics led to the sequencing of the human genome in 2003 .
inheritance in organisms occurs by passing discrete heritable units , called genes , from parents to offspring .
gregor mendel , who studied the segregation of heritable traits in pea plants .
in his experiments studying the trait for flower colour , mendel observed that the flowers of each pea plant were either purple or white .
these different , discrete versions of the same gene are called alleles .
in the case of the pea , which is a diploid species , each individual plant has two copies of each gene , one copy inherited from each parent .
many species , including humans , have this pattern of inheritance .
diploid organisms with two different alleles of a gene are called heterozygous .
the set of alleles for a given organism is called its genotype .
when organisms are heterozygous at a gene , one allele is called dominant .
some do not have complete dominance .
when a pair of organisms reproduce sexually , their offspring randomly inherit one of the two alleles from each parent .
these observations of discrete inheritance and the segregation of alleles are collectively known as mendel 's first law or the law of segregation .
geneticists use diagrams and symbols to describe inheritance .
a gene is written in one or a few letters .
often a " + " symbol is used to mark the usual non-mutant gene for a gene .
in fertilization and breeding experiments , especially when discussing mendel 's laws prohibits the parents are referred to as the " p " generation and the offspring as the " f1 "graphs first filial immigrated generation .
when the f1 offspring mate with each other , the offspring are called the f2naud second filial [mask] generation .
one of the common diagrams used to predict the result of cross-breeding is the punnett square .
geneticists try to use pedigree charts to show how traits are inheritance .
these charts map the inheritance of a family tree .
organisms have thousands of genes .
the inheritance of an allele for yellow or green pea color is unrelated to the inheritance of alleles for white or purple flowers .
this is known as " mendel 's second law " or the " law of independent assortment " .
although although some genes do not assort independently , demonstrating genetic linkage , a topic discussed later in this article .
different genes can interact in a way that influences the same trait .
in the blue-eyed maryacio " omphalodes verna "arth , for example , there exists a gene with alleles that determine the color of flowers : blue or magenta .
another gene controls whether the flowers have color at all or are white .
if a plant has two copies of this white allele , its flowers are white .
this interaction between genes is called epistasis .
many traits are not discrete features .
these complex traits are products of many genes .
the influence of these genes is mediated , to varying degrees , by the environment an organism has experienced .
the degree to which an organism 's genes contribute to a complex trait is called heritability .
measurement of the heritability of a trait is relative .
for example , human height is a trait with many different causes .
it has a heritability of 89 % in the united states .
in nigeria , where people have a more variable access to good nutrition and health care , height has a heritability of only 62 % .
the molecular basis for genes is deoxyribonucleic acidctricity .
dna is composed of a chain of nucleotides .
genetic information exists in the sequence of these nucleotides , and genes exist as stretches of sequence along the dna chain .
viruses are the only exception to this rule , but viruses use the similar molecule rna instead of dna as their genetic material .
viruses produce without a host and are unaffected by many genetic processes , so tend not to be considered living organisms .
dna normally exists as a double-stranded molecule , coiled into the shape of a double helix .
each nucleotide in dna is pairs with its partner nucleotide on the opposite strand .
dna replication duplicates the genetic information by splitting the strands .
genes are arranged in linearly along long chains of dna base-pair sequences .
in bacteria , each cell usually contains a single circular genophore .
the largest human chromosome is about 247 million base pairs in length .
the dna of a chromosome is linked with proteins that organize , compact , and control access to the dna .
the full set of hereditary material in an organism makes up the genome .
haploid organisms have only one copy of each chromosome .
the two alleles for a gene are on identical loci of the two chromosomes , each allele inherited from a different parent .
many species have sex chromosomes which determine the gender of one organism .
in humans and many other animals , the y chromosome contains the gene that triggers the development of male characteristics .
in evolution , this chromosome has lost most of its content and also most of its genes .
the x and y chromosomes are strongly heterogeneous .
cells divide their genome into one copy .
it is the basis for asexual reproduction .
asexual reproduction can also occur in multicellular organisms , producing offspring that inherit their genome from a single parent .
identical twins are natural clones .
eukaryotic organisms use sexual reproduction to produce offspring that contain a mixture of genetic material inherited from two different parents .
the process of sexual reproduction alternates between forms that contain single copies of the genomeloid haploideux .
haploid cells fuse and combine genetic material to create a diploid cell with paired chromosomes .
diploid organisms form haploids by dividing , without replicating their dna , to create daughter cells that randomly inherit one of each pair of chromosomes .
most animals and many plants are diploid for most of their lifespan .
although they do not use the haploid / diploid method of sexual reproduction , bacteria have many methods of acquiring new genetic information .
some bacteria can undergo conjugation , transferring a small circular piece of dna to another bacterium .
bacteria can also take up raw dna fragments found in the environment and integrate them into their genomes .
these processes result in horizontal gene transfer , and transmitting fragments of genetic information between organisms that would otherwise be unrelated .
the diploid nature of chromosomes allows genes on different chromosomes to assort independently or be separated from their homologous pair during sexual reproduction .
new combinations of genes can occur in the offspring of a mating pair .
genes on the same chromosome would never recombine .
however , they do , by the cell process of chromosomal crossover .
during crossover , chromosomes exchange stretches of dna , effectively shuffling the gene alleles between the chromosomes .
this process of chromosomal crossover generally occurs during meiosis , a series of cell divisions that produce haploid cells .
the first cytological demonstration of crossing over was performed by harriet creighton and barbara mcclintock in 1931 .
their research and experiments on corn provided evidence for the genetic theory that linked genes on paired chromosomes do in fact exchange places from one homolog to the other .
the probability of chromosomal crossover between two given points on the chromosome is related to the distance between the points .
for an arbitrarily long distance , the probability of crossover is high enough that the inheritance of the genes is effectively uncorrelated .
alleles for the two genes tend to be inherited together .
the amounts of linkage between a series of genes can be combined to form a linear linkage map .
genes generally express their functional effect through the production of proteins , which are complex molecules responsible for most functions in the cell .
proteins are made up of polypeptide chains , each of which is composed of a sequence of amino acids , and the dna sequence of a gene gene mutation through an rna intermediate finds out the amino acid sequence .
the dna sequence begins with the start of the process of transcription .
it is then used to make a amino acid sequence through a process called translation .
each group of three nucleotides in the sequence , called a codon , corresponds either to one of the twenty possible amino acids in a protein or an instruction to end the amino acid sequence .
the flow of information is unidirectional : information is transferred from nucleotide sequences into the amino acid sequence of proteins , but it never transfers from protein back into the sequence of dna .
the three-dimensional structures of proteins are related to their functions .
some are simple structural molecules , like the fibers made by the protein collagen .
proteins can bind to other proteins and simple molecules .
protein structure is dynamic ; the protein hemoglobin bends into slightly different forms as it helps capture , transport , and release of oxygen in mammalian blood .
a single nucleotide difference in dna can cause a change in the amino acid sequence of a protein .
because protein structures are the result of their amino acid sequences , some changes can dramatically change the properties of a protein by destabilizing the structure or changing the surface of the protein in a way that changes its interaction with other proteins and molecules .
sickle-cell anemia is a human genetic disease .
sickle-cell versions of hemoglobin stick to themselves , stacking to form fibers that distort the shape of red blood cells carrying the protein .
these sickle-shaped cells no longer flow through blood vessels .
some dna sequences are transcribed into rna , but are not translated into protein products .
in some cases , these products fold into structures which are involved in critical cell functions .
rna can also have regulatory effects through hybridization interactions with other rna molecules moleculestase .
although genes contain all the information an organism uses to function , the environment plays an important role in determining the ultimate phenotypes an organism displays .
the phrase " nature and nurture " refers to this relationship .
the genes and the environment are affected by genes .
an interesting example is the coat of the siamese cat .
in this case , the body temperature of the cat plays the role of the environment .
the cat 's genes code for dark hair .
but these dark hair-producing proteins are sensitive to temperature measurements .
in a low temperature environment , however , the protein 's structure is stable and produces dark-hair pigment normally .
the protein remains functional in areas of skin that are coldersuch as its legs , ears , tail and faceso the cat has dark hair at its extremities .
environment plays a major role in the effects of the human genetic disease phenylketonuria .
the mutation that causes phenylketonuria disrupts the ability of the body to break down the amino acid phenylalanine , causing severe symptoms of progressive intellectual disability and seizures .
if someone with the phenylketonuria mutation follows a strict diet that avoids this amino acid , they remain normal and healthy .
a common method for determining how genes and environmentomorphic " nature and nurture " contribute to a phenotype involves studying identical twins , or other siblings of multiple birth .
identical twin siblings are the same as identical twines .
fraternal twins are as genetically different from one another .
scientists can determine whether that disorder is caused by genetic or postnatal environmental factors .
one famous example was the study of the quadruplets , who were identical quadruplets all diagnosed with schizophrenia .
such tests contradicted the development of the child , and so on the genetic factors that determine the development of the child is not possible .
the genome of a given organism contains thousands of genes , but not all these genes need to be active at any given moment .
a gene is transcribed into mrna .
transcription factors are regulatory proteins that bind to dna , either promoting or inhibiting the transcription of a gene .
for example , there exists a series of genes needed for the synthesis of the amino acid tryptophan .
when tryptophan is already available to the cell , these genes for tryptophan synthesis are no longer needed .
the presence of tryptophan directly affects the activity of the genes – tryptophan molecules bind to the tryptophan repressorcierciercierciercierciercierciercierosomes .
the tryptophan repressor blocks the transcription and expression of the genes .
differences in gene expression are especially clear in multicellular organisms , where cells all contain the same genome but have very different structures and behaviors .
all the cells in a multicellular organism derive from a single cell .
as no single gene is responsible for the development of structures within multicellular organisms , these patterns arise from the complex interactions between many cells .
in eukaryotes , there are structural features of chromatin that influence the transcription of genes .
these features are called " epigenetic " because they exist on top of the dna sequence and retain inheritance from one cell generation to the next .
because of epigenetic features , different cell types can keep very different properties .
although epigenetic features are generally dynamic over the course of development , some have multigenerational inheritance .
during the process of dna replication , errors sometimes occur in the polymerization of the second strand .
these errors , called mutations , can affect the phenotype of an organism .
error rates are usually very low-1 error in every 10-100 million bases .
processes that increase the rate of changes in dna are called mutagenic : mutagenic chemicals promote errors in dna replication , often by interfering with the structure of base-pairing , while uv radiation induces mutations by causing damage to the dna structure .
chemical damages to dna occurs naturally .
the repair does not , however , always restore the original sequence .
in organisms that use chromosomal crossovers to exchange dna and recombine genes , errors in alignment during meiosis can also cause mutations .
errors in crossover are especially likely when similar sequences cause partner chromosomes to adopt a mistaken alignment .
these errors make large changes in dna sequenceduplications , inversions , deletions of entire regions .
mutations alter an organism 's genotype and sometimes this causes different phenotypes to appear .
most mutations have little effect on an organism 's phenotype , health , or reproductive fitness .
mutations that do have an effect are usually bad , but sometimes some can be good .
studies in the fly " drosophila melanogaster " suggest that if a mutation changes a protein produced by a gene , about 70 % of these mutations will be harmful .
population genetics studies the distribution of genetic differences in populations and how these distributions change over time .
changes in the frequency of an allele in a population are mainly influenced by natural selection .
over many generations , the genomes of organisms can change a lot , resulting in evolution .
selection for beneficial mutations can cause a species to evolve into better able to survive in their environment .
new species are formed through the process of speciation , often caused by geographical separations that prevent populations from exchanging genes with each other .
by comparing the homology between different species ' genomes , it is possible to calculate the evolutionary distance between them and when they diverged .
genetic comparisons are generally considered a more accurate method of characterizing the relatedness between species than the comparison of phenotypic characteristics .
the evolutionary distances between species can be used to form evolutionary trees .
although geneticists originally studied inheritance in a wide range of organisms , researchers began to study the genetics of a particular subset of organisms .
so a few model organisms became the basis for most genetics research .
common research topics in model organism genetics include the study of gene regulation and the involvement of genes in development and cancer .
organisms were chosen , in part , for convenience – short generation times and easy genetic manipulation made some organisms popular genetics research tools .
examples of model organisms include the gut bacterium " escherichia coli " , the plant " arabidopsis thaliana " , baker 's yeast aarhus " saccharomyces cerevisiae " , the nematode " caenorhabditis elegans " , the common fruit fly fruit fly " musculuss " , and the common mouse " mullus " .
medical genetics try to understand how genetic variation relates to human health and disease .
searching for an unknown gene may be involved in a disease , researchers commonly use genetic linkage and gene pedigree charts to find the location on the genome associated with the disease .
researchers take advantage of mendelian randomization to look for places in the genome that are associated with diseases .
once a candidate gene is found , further research is often done on the corresponding ( or homologous kapoor genes of model organisms .
the study of how genotype can affect drug responses is .
individuals differ in their inherited tendency to develop cancer , and cancer is a genetic disease .
cancer development in the body is a process of making people sick .
mutations are sometimes found in cells in the body as they divide .
although these mutations will not be inherited by any offspring , they can affect the behavior of cells .
there are biological mechanisms that try to stop this process .
an internal process of natural selection occurs within the body .
normally , a cell divides only in response to signals called growth factors .
it usually divides a limited number of times and dies .
to become a cancer cell , a cell has to accumulate mutations in a number of genes .
a cancer cell can divide without growth factor and ignores inhibitory signals .
also , it is immortal and can grow indefinitely , even after it makes contact with neighboring cells .
it may escape from the epithelium and ultimately from the primary tumor .
then , the escaped cell can cross the endothelium of a blood vessel and get transported by the bloodstream to colonize a new organ , forming deadly metastasis .
there are some genetic mutations in a small fraction of cancers .
the most frequent mutations are loss of function of p53 protein , a tumor suppressor , or in the p53 pathway , and gain of function mutations in the ras proteins , or in other oncogenes .
dna can be used in the laboratory .
restriction enzymes are commonly used enzymes that cut dna at specific sequences , producing predictable fragments of dna .
dna fragments can be seen through use of gel electrophoresis , which separates fragments according to their length .
ligation enzymes allow dna fragments to be connected .
by binding toes " ligating " fragments of dna together from different sources , researchers can create recombinant dna .
recombinant dna is commonly used in the context of plasmids : short circular dna molecules with a few genes on them .
researchers can amplify the dna fragments by inserting plasmids into bacteria and then culturing them on plates of agarfied to isolate cloned cells .
dna can also be amplified using a procedure called the polymerase chain reaction pcrwiczs .
by using specific short sequences of dna , pcr can isolate and exponentially amplify a targeted region of dna .
it can amplify from extremely small amounts of dna .
dna sequencing , one of the most fundamental technologies developed to study genetics , allows researchers to determine the sequence of nucleotides in dna fragments .
the technique of chain-termination sequencing , developed in 1977 by a team led by frederick sanger , is still routinely used to sequence dna fragments .
using this technology , researchers have been able to study the molecular sequences associated with many human diseases .
as sequencing has become less expensive , researchers have sequenced the genomes of many organisms using a process called genome assembly .
these technologies were used to sequence the human genome in the human genome project completed in 2003 .
new high-throughput sequencing technologies are dramatically lowering the cost of dna sequencing .
next-generation sequencing came about due to the ever-increasing demand for low-cost sequencing .
these sequencing technologies allow the production of potentially millions of sequences concurrently .
the large amount of sequence data available has created the field of genomics .
genomics is a subfield of bioinformatics .
a common problem to these fields is how to manage and share data that deals with human subject and personally identifiable information .
see also genomics data sharing .
on 19 march 2015 , a group of leading biologists urged a worldwide ban on clinical use of methods , particularly the use of crispr and zinc finger , to edit the human genome in a way that can be inherited .
in april 2015 , chinese researchers reported results of basic research to edit the dna of non-viable human embryos using crispr .
