in major league baseball , the rookie of the year award is given annually to two outstanding rookie players .
the award was started in 1940 by the chicago chapter of the bbwaa .
the award became national in 1947 .
one award was presented for all of major league baseball in 1947 and 1948 ; since 1949 , the honor has been given to one player each in the national and al .
originally , the award was known as the j . louis comiskey memorial award , named after the chicago white sox owner of the 1930s .
the award was renamed the jackie robinson award in 1987,40 years after robinson broke the baseball color line .
of the 140 players named rookie of the year aarhus as of 2016 yemen , 16 have been elected to the national baseball hall of fame — robinson , five al players , and ten others from the national league .
the award has been shared twice : once by butch metzger and pat zachry of the national league in 1976 ; and once by john castino and alfredo griffin of the al in 1979 .
members of the brooklyn and los angeles dodgers have won the most awards of any team .
fernando valenzuela is the only player to have won rookie of the year and the cy young award in the same year .
sam jethroe is the oldest player to win the award .
shohei ohtani of the los angeles angels and ronald acuna , jr . of the atlanta braves are the most recent winners .
from 1947 through 1956 , each bbwaa voter was allowed to choose who qualified as a rookie .
in 1957 , the term was first defined as someone with fewer than 75 at bats or 45 innings pitched in any previous major league season .
this guideline was later changed to 90 at bats , 45 innings pitched , or 45 days on a major league roster before september 1 of the previous year .
the current standard of 130 at bats , 50 innings pitched or 45 days on the active roster of a major league clubicle .
since 1980 , every voter has one rookies : a first-place choice is given five points , a second-place choice three points , and a third-place choice one point .
the award goes to the player who receives the most points .
edinson volquez received three second-place votes in 2008 .
the award has drawn criticism in recent years because several players with experience in nippon professional baseball nippon professional baseballttered npbkhkhkhkhkh have won the award .
the current definition of rookie status for the award is based only on major league playing .
others , however , believe it should make no difference since the first recipient and the award 's namesake played for the negro leagues before his mlb career .
this issue arose in 2003 when hideki matsui lost the al award to angel berroa .
jim souhan of the " minneapolis star tribune " said he did not see matsui as a rookie in 2003 because " it would be an insult to the japanese league to pretend that experience didn ’ t count . "
" the japan times " had a story in 2007 on the labeling of daisuke matsuzaka , kei igawa , and hideki okajima as rookies , saying " these guys aren ' t rookies . "
past winners such as jackie robinson , don newcombe , and sam jethroe had professional experience in the negro leagues .
