rock and rollouts are a type of popular music that originated in the united states during the late 1940s and early 1950s .
the genre began in the 1920s and 1940s , but it was not until 1954 .
according to greg kot , " rock and roll " refers to a style of popular music that was first made in the 1950s .
for the purpose of differentiation , this article deals with the first definition .
in the early rock and roll styles , either the piano or saxophone was the lead instrument , but these instruments were replaced by guitar in the middle to late 1950s .
the beat is essentially a dance rhythm with a backbeat , which is almost always provided by a snare drum .
classic rock and roll is usually played with one or two electric guitars — one lead , one rhythmometer , a double bass or string bass orissa after the mid-1950s ; or alternatively , after the mid-1950s , a drum kit , and a drum kit .
beyond a musical style , rock and roll , as seen in movies , in fan magazines , and on television , influenced lifestyles , fashion , attitudes , and language .
rock and roll may have contributed to the civil rights movement .
it went on to spawn various genres , often without the initial characteristic backbeat , that are now more commonly called simply " rock music " or " rock " .
the term " rock and roll " is defined by " encyclopædia britannica " as the music that originated in the mid-1950s and later developed " into the more encompassing international style known as rock music " .
the term is sometimes used as synonymous with " rock music " .
the phrase " rocking and rolling " originally meant the movement of a ship on the ocean , but was used by the early 20th century .
various gospel , blues and swing recordings used the phrase before it became used more frequently .
in 1934 , the song " rock and roll " by the boswell sisters appeared in the movie " transatlantic merry-go-round " .
in 1942 , " billboard " magazine columnist maurie orodenker started to use the term " rock-and-roll " to describe upbeat recordings such as " rock me " by sister rosetta tharpe .
by 1943 , the rock and roll inn in south merchantville , new jersey , was established as a music venue .
in 1951 , a disc jockey from cleveland , ohio began playing this music style while popularizing the phrase to describe it .
the origins of rock and roll have been debated by commentators and historians of music .
there is general agreement that it arose in the southern united states .
the migration of many former slaves and their descendants to major cities such as st . louis , memphis , new york city , detroit , detroit , chicago , cleveland , and buffalo caused the migration of african americans .
this helped this process of " cultural collision " .
the immediate roots of rock and roll were in the rhythm and blues , then called " race music " , and country music of the 1940s and 1950s .
they were influenced by jazz , blues , gospel , country , and folk .
commentators differ in their views of which of these forms were most important .
in the 1930s , jazz , and particularly swing , both in urban-based dance bands and blues-influenced country swing singers were among the first music to present african-american sounds for a predominantly white audience .
one example of a jazz song with recognizably rock and roll elements is big joe turner with pianist pete johnson 's 1939 single " roll ' em pete " , which is regarded as an important precursor of rock and roll .
in the 1940s , the increased use of blaring hornsamines would make the saxophones narrower .
during and immediately after world war ii , jazz bands were less economical and tended to be replaced by smaller combos , using guitars , bass and drums .
in the same period , particularly on the west coast and in the midwest , the development of jump blues , with its guitar riffs , prominent beats and shouted lyrics , prefigured many later developments .
in the documentary film " hail !
rock ' n ' roll " , keith richards , says that chuck berry developed his brand of rock and roll by transposing the familiar two-note lead line of jump blues piano directly to the electric guitar .
like the country boogie and chicago electric blues , the blues were influenced by many of the elements that would be seen as characteristic of rock and roll .
he made the electric guitar as its centerpiece .
soon after the change of the electric guitar , amplifier and microphone was made , and the 45 rpm record was 45 rpm .
they also had a similar rise of radio stations that played their music .
it was thought that relatively rich white teenagers were listening to this music that led to the development of rock and roll as a distinct genre .
no single record can be identified as " the first " rock and roll record .
contenders for the title of " first rock and roll record " include sister rosetta tharpe 's " strange things happening every day " ; " the fat man " by fats domino ; 1949 – 1949 ; goree carter 's " rock awhile " ; jimmy preston 's " rock the joint " , and sam trooxis , and the delta delta cats , and the " delta " , and later " delta delta " , and " the delta delta " .
in terms of its wide cultural impact across society in the u . s . and elsewhere , bill haley 's " rock around the clock " , recorded in april 1954 but not a commercial success until the following year , is generally recognized as an important milestone .
other artists with early rock and roll hits included chuck berry , bo diddley , little richard , jerry lee lewis , and gene vincent .
chuck berry 's 1955 classic " maybellene " in particular features a distorted electric guitar solo with warm overtones made by his small valve amplifier .
however , the use of distortion was made before the invention of electric blues guitarists such as joe hill louis , guitar slim , willie johnson of howlin ' wolf 's band , and pat hare .
also in 1955 , bo diddley introduced the " bo diddley beat " and a unique electric guitar style , influenced by african and afro-cuban music .
rockabilly is a type of rock and roll music which was played and recorded in the mid-1950s .
elvis presley was influenced by many of the greatest african-american musicians like bb king , chuck berry , and fats domino .
his style of music combined with black influences created controversy during a turbulent time in history .
many other popular rock and roll singers of the time , such as fats domino and little richard , came out of the black rhythm and blues tradition , making the music attractive to white audiences , and are not usually classed as " rockabilly " .
bill flagg who is a connecticut resident , began calling his mix of hillbilly and rock ' n ' roll music as rockabilly around 1953 .
his song " guitar rock " is considered as classic rockabilly .
in july 1954 , elvis presley recorded the regional hit " that 's all right " at sam phillips ' sun studio in memphis .
bill haley and his comets recorded " rock around the clock " on april 12,1954 .
it set the rock and roll boom in motion .
the song became one of the biggest hits in history .
" rock around the clock " was a breakthrough for both the group and for all of rock and roll music .
" rock around the clock " was the opening song to a global audience .
in 1956 , the arrival of rockabilly was underlined by the success of songs like " folsom prison blues " by johnny cash , " blue suede shoes " by perkins and the # 1 hit " heartbreak hotel " by presley .
for a few years it became the most commercially successful form of rock and roll .
later rockabilly acts , particularly performing songwriters like buddy holly , would be a major influence on british invasion acts and especially on the song writing of the beatles and through them on the nature of later rock music .
doo-wop was one of the most popular forms of 1950s rhythm and blues , often compared with rock and roll .
the beginnings of the musical were in african-american vocal groups of the 1930s and 40s .
after the 1940s r & b vocal acts such as the orioles , the ravens and the clovers , who injected a strong element of traditional gospel and , increasingly , the energy of jump blues .
by 1954 , as rock and roll was beginning to emerge , a number of similar acts began to cross over from the r & b charts to mainstream success , often with the crows , the penguins , the el dorados and the turbans all scoring major hits .
despite the subsequent explosion in records from doo wop acts in the later ' 50s , many did not chart or were one-hit wonders .
exceptions included the platters , with songs including " the great pretender " 6th earl " — 1955 — and the coasters with humorous songs like " yakety yak " — 1958 .
in the late 1960s , there were increasing numbers of white , particularly italian-american , singers taking up doo wop , creating all-white groups like the mystics and dion and the belmonts and racially integrated groups like the del-vikings and the impalas .
doo-wop was a major influence on vocal surf music , soul and early merseybeat , including the beatles .
many of the earliest white rock and roll hits were covers or partial re-writes of earlier black rhythm and blues songs .
r & b music had been gaining a stronger beat and a wilder style .
before the efforts of freed and others , black music was taboo on many white-owned radio outlets , but artists and producers quickly recognized the potential of rock and roll .
some of presley 's early recordings were covers of black rhythm and blues songs , such as " that 's all right " .
the racial lines , however , are rather more clouded by the fact that some of these r & b songs originally recorded by black artists had been written by white songwriters , such as the team of jerry leiber and mike stoller .
many publishers , record executives , and even managers would insert their name as a composer in order to collect royalty checks .
covers were customary in the music industry at the time ; it was made particularly easy by the compulsory license provision of united states copyright law prohibitsppiness .
one of the first relevant hits was roy brown 's 1947 original jump blues hit " good rocking tonight " into a more showy rocker and the louis prima rocker " oh babe " in 1950 , as well as amos milburn 's cover of what may have been the first white rock and roll record , in 1949 .
the most notable trend was white pop covers of black r & b numbers .
the more familiar sound of these covers may have been more palatable to white audiences , but labels aimed at the white market also had much better distribution networks and were generally much more profitable .
pat boone recorded versions of songs recorded by the likes of fats domino , little richard , the flamingos and ivory joe hunter .
later , as those songs became popular , the original artists ' recordings received radio play as well .
the cover versions were not easy imitations .
for example , bill haley 's version of " shake , rattle and roll " transformed big joe turner 's humorous and racy tale of adult love into an energetic teen dance number .
elvis ' rock and roll version of " hound dog " was very different from the blues shouter that big mama thornton had recorded four years earlier .
other white artists who recorded cover versions of rhythm & blues songs included gale storm smiley lewis ' " i hear you knockin ' " , the diamonds the gladiolas ' " little darlin " and frankie lymon & the teenagers ' " why do fools fall in love ? " ,
the crew cuts the chords ' " sh-boom " and nappy brown 's " don ’ t be angry " , the fountain sisters the jewels ' " hearts of stone " and the maguire sisters the moonglows ' " sincerely " .
some commentators have suggested that rock and roll was popular in the late 1950s and early 1960s .
by 1959 , the deaths of buddy holly , the big bopper and ritchie valens in a plane crash happened on february 1959 .
during the late 1950s and early 1960s , the rawer sounds of elvis presley , gene vincent , jerry lee lewis and buddy holly were commercially superseded by a more polished , commercial style of rock and roll .
marketing frequently emphasized the physical looks of the artist rather than the music .
some music historians have pointed to important developments that built on rock and roll in this period , including multitrack recording , developed by les paul , the electronic treatment of sound by such innovators as joe meek , and the " wall of sound " productions of phil spector , continued desegregation of the rise of surf rock and the twist of surf rock and the craze twist .
surf rock became one of the most popular forms of american rock of the 1960s .
in the 1950s , britain was well-known to receive american rock and roll music and culture .
it shared a common language , had been exposed to american culture through the stationing of troops in the country .
trad jazz became popular , and many of its musicians were influenced by related american styles , including boogie woogie and the blues .
the skiffle craze , led by lonnie donegan , made amateurish versions of american folk songs .
at the same time british audiences were beginning to encounter american rock and roll , initially through films including " blackboard jungle " liszt liszt liszt lisztoped 1955hesis and " rock around the clock " 6th earl of york city .
the first was in 1955 , and it reached the british charts in the united kingdom .
american rock and roll acts such as elvis presley , little richard , buddy holly , chuck berry and carl perkins became major forces in the british charts .
the british music industry was to try to produce copies of american records , recorded with session musicians and often fronted by teen idols .
more grassroots rock and rollers soon began to appear , including wee willie harris and tommy steele .
in 1958 britain produced its first " authentic " rock and roll song and star , when cliff richard reached number 2 in the charts with " move it " .
at the same time , tv shows such as " six-five special " and " oh boy ! "
the band promoted the careers of british rock and rollers like marty wilde and adam faith .
cliff richard and his backing band , the shadows , were the most successful home grown rock and roll acts of the era .
other leading acts included billy fury , joe brown , and johnny kidd & the pirates .
it was started in the late 1950s and early 1960s .
about the same time , a british blues scene developed .
many groups moved towards the beat music of rock and roll and blues from skiffle , like the quarrymen who became the beatles , producing a form of rock and roll revivalism that carried them and many other groups to national success from about 1963 and to 1964 .
other groups that followed the beatles included freddie and the dreamers , wayne fontana and the mindbenders , herman 's hermits and the dave clark five .
early british rhythm and blues groups with more blues influences include the animals , the rolling stones , and the yardbirds .
rock and roll influenced lifestyles , fashion , attitudes , and language .
rock and roll may have contributed to the civil rights movement .
many early rock and roll songs were about issues of cars , school , dating , and clothing .
the lyrics of rock and roll songs were about conflicts that most listeners could relate to through personal experience .
topics such as sex that had generally been considered taboo began to appear in rock and roll lyrics .
this new music tried to break boundaries and express emotions that people were actually feeling but had not talked about .
the awakening started in american youth culture .
the crossover of african-american " race music " to a growing white youth audience , the popularization of rock and roll involved both black performers reaching a white audience and white musicians performing african-american music .
rock and roll appeared at a time when racial tensions in the united states were entering a new phase , with the beginnings of the civil rights movement for desegregation .
the coming together of white youth audiences and black music in rock and roll caused strong white racist reactions in the us .
many people saw rock and roll as a way for desegregation , in creating a new form of music that encouraged racial cooperation and shared experience .
some people say that early rock and roll was important in the way both white and black teenagers identified themselves .
rock and roll was one of the first music genres to define an age group .
it gave teenagers a sense of being a member , even when they were alone .
rock and roll is often seen with the emergence of teen culture among the first baby boomer generation .
it also extended to film , clothes , cars and motorbikes , and distinctive language .
the youth culture of rock and roll was a recurring source of concern for older generations .
in america , that concern was given even in youth cultural artifacts such as comic books .
in " there 's no romance in rock and roll " from " true life romance "ropolis 1956 c1 , a defiant teen dates a rock and roll-loving boy but drops him for one who likes traditional adult music .
in britain , the teddy boy movement became part of the early 20th century .
rock and roll has been seen as a reorienting popular music toward a youth market .
in the early 1950s , the popularity of rhythm and blues music spread .
teenagers found the syncopated backbeat rhythm which was very good for big band-era jitterbug dancing .
american teens watched the latest american bandstand to keep up on the latest dance and fashion styles .
later , the genres " rock and roll " were later renamed to " rock , " .
