rock and rollouts are a type of popular music that originated in the united states during the late 1940s and early 1950s .
in the early rock and roll styles , either the piano or saxophone was the lead instrument , but these instruments were replaced by guitar in the middle to late 1950s .
classic rock and roll is usually played with one or two electric guitars — one lead , one rhythmometer , a double bass or string bass orissa after the mid-1950s ; or alternatively , after the mid-1950s , a drum kit , and a drum kit .
it went on to spawn various genres , often without the initial characteristic backbeat , that are now more commonly called simply " rock music " or " rock " .
the term " rock and roll " is defined by " encyclopædia britannica " as the music that originated in the mid-1950s and later developed " into the more encompassing international style known as rock music " .
the phrase " rocking and rolling " originally meant the movement of a ship on the ocean , but was used by the early 20th century .
in 1934 , the song " rock and roll " by the boswell sisters appeared in the movie " transatlantic merry-go-round " .
by 1943 , the rock and roll inn in south merchantville , new jersey , was established as a music venue .
in 1951 , a disc jockey from cleveland , ohio began playing this music style while popularizing the phrase to describe it .
the origins of rock and roll have been debated by commentators and historians of music .
the migration of many former slaves and their descendants to major cities such as st . louis , memphis , new york city , detroit , detroit , chicago , cleveland , and buffalo caused the migration of african americans .
the immediate roots of rock and roll were in the rhythm and blues , then called " race music " , and country music of the 1940s and 1950s .
one example of a jazz song with recognizably rock and roll elements is big joe turner with pianist pete johnson 's 1939 single " roll ' em pete " , which is regarded as an important precursor of rock and roll .
during and immediately after world war ii , jazz bands were less economical and tended to be replaced by smaller combos , using guitars , bass and drums .
in the same period , particularly on the west coast and in the midwest , the development of jump blues , with its guitar riffs , prominent beats and shouted lyrics , prefigured many later developments .
rock ' n ' roll " , keith richards , says that chuck berry developed his brand of rock and roll by transposing the familiar two-note lead line of jump blues piano directly to the electric guitar .
like the country boogie and chicago electric blues , the blues were influenced by many of the elements that would be seen as characteristic of rock and roll .
soon after the change of the electric guitar , amplifier and microphone was made , and the 45 rpm record was 45 rpm .
it was thought that relatively rich white teenagers were listening to this music that led to the development of rock and roll as a distinct genre .
no single record can be identified as " the first " rock and roll record .
in terms of its wide cultural impact across society in the u . s . and elsewhere , bill haley 's " rock around the clock " , recorded in april 1954 but not a commercial success until the following year , is generally recognized as an important milestone .
other artists with early rock and roll hits included chuck berry , bo diddley , little richard , jerry lee lewis , and gene vincent .
however , the use of distortion was made before the invention of electric blues guitarists such as joe hill louis , guitar slim , willie johnson of howlin ' wolf 's band , and pat hare .
elvis presley was influenced by many of the greatest african-american musicians like bb king , chuck berry , and fats domino .
his style of music combined with black influences created controversy during a turbulent time in history .
many other popular rock and roll singers of the time , such as fats domino and little richard , came out of the black rhythm and blues tradition , making the music attractive to white audiences , and are not usually classed as " rockabilly " .
in 1956 , the arrival of rockabilly was underlined by the success of songs like " folsom prison blues " by johnny cash , " blue suede shoes " by perkins and the # 1 hit " heartbreak hotel " by presley .
later rockabilly acts , particularly performing songwriters like buddy holly , would be a major influence on british invasion acts and especially on the song writing of the beatles and through them on the nature of later rock music .
after the 1940s r & b vocal acts such as the orioles , the ravens and the clovers , who injected a strong element of traditional gospel and , increasingly , the energy of jump blues .
by 1954 , as rock and roll was beginning to emerge , a number of similar acts began to cross over from the r & b charts to mainstream success , often with the crows , the penguins , the el dorados and the turbans all scoring major hits .
despite the subsequent explosion in records from doo wop acts in the later ' 50s , many did not chart or were one-hit wonders .
exceptions included the platters , with songs including " the great pretender " 6th earl " — 1955 — and the coasters with humorous songs like " yakety yak " — 1958 .
in the late 1960s , there were increasing numbers of white , particularly italian-american , singers taking up doo wop , creating all-white groups like the mystics and dion and the belmonts and racially integrated groups like the del-vikings and the impalas .
doo-wop was a major influence on vocal surf music , soul and early merseybeat , including the beatles .
before the efforts of freed and others , black music was taboo on many white-owned radio outlets , but artists and producers quickly recognized the potential of rock and roll .
some of presley 's early recordings were covers of black rhythm and blues songs , such as " that 's all right " .
the racial lines , however , are rather more clouded by the fact that some of these r & b songs originally recorded by black artists had been written by white songwriters , such as the team of jerry leiber and mike stoller .
many publishers , record executives , and even managers would insert their name as a composer in order to collect royalty checks .
covers were customary in the music industry at the time ; it was made particularly easy by the compulsory license provision of united states copyright law prohibitsppiness .
one of the first relevant hits was roy brown 's 1947 original jump blues hit " good rocking tonight " into a more showy rocker and the louis prima rocker " oh babe " in 1950 , as well as amos milburn 's cover of what may have been the first white rock and roll record , in 1949 .
the most notable trend was white pop covers of black r & b numbers .
pat boone recorded versions of songs recorded by the likes of fats domino , little richard , the flamingos and ivory joe hunter .
for example , bill haley 's version of " shake , rattle and roll " transformed big joe turner 's humorous and racy tale of adult love into an energetic teen dance number .
elvis ' rock and roll version of " hound dog " was very different from the blues shouter that big mama thornton had recorded four years earlier .
other white artists who recorded cover versions of rhythm & blues songs included gale storm smiley lewis ' " i hear you knockin ' " , the diamonds the gladiolas ' " little darlin " and frankie lymon & the teenagers ' " why do fools fall in love ? "
some commentators have suggested that rock and roll was popular in the late 1950s and early 1960s .
by 1959 , the deaths of buddy holly , the big bopper and ritchie valens in a plane crash happened on february 1959 .
during the late 1950s and early 1960s , the rawer sounds of elvis presley , gene vincent , jerry lee lewis and buddy holly were commercially superseded by a more polished , commercial style of rock and roll .
some music historians have pointed to important developments that built on rock and roll in this period , including multitrack recording , developed by les paul , the electronic treatment of sound by such innovators as joe meek , and the " wall of sound " productions of phil spector , continued desegregation of the rise of surf rock and the twist of surf rock and the craze twist .
it shared a common language , had been exposed to american culture through the stationing of troops in the country .
trad jazz became popular , and many of its musicians were influenced by related american styles , including boogie woogie and the blues .
at the same time british audiences were beginning to encounter american rock and roll , initially through films including " blackboard jungle " liszt liszt liszt lisztoped 1955hesis and " rock around the clock " 6th earl of york city .
the british music industry was to try to produce copies of american records , recorded with session musicians and often fronted by teen idols .
the band promoted the careers of british rock and rollers like marty wilde and adam faith .
cliff richard and his backing band , the shadows , were the most successful home grown rock and roll acts of the era .
other leading acts included billy fury , joe brown , and johnny kidd & the pirates .
many groups moved towards the beat music of rock and roll and blues from skiffle , like the quarrymen who became the beatles , producing a form of rock and roll revivalism that carried them and many other groups to national success from about 1963 and to 1964 .
other groups that followed the beatles included freddie and the dreamers , wayne fontana and the mindbenders , herman 's hermits and the dave clark five .
early british rhythm and blues groups with more blues influences include the animals , the rolling stones , and the yardbirds .
the lyrics of rock and roll songs were about conflicts that most listeners could relate to through personal experience .
topics such as sex that had generally been considered taboo began to appear in rock and roll lyrics .
the crossover of african-american " race music " to a growing white youth audience , the popularization of rock and roll involved both black performers reaching a white audience and white musicians performing african-american music .
the coming together of white youth audiences and black music in rock and roll caused strong white racist reactions in the us .
many people saw rock and roll as a way for desegregation , in creating a new form of music that encouraged racial cooperation and shared experience .
rock and roll was one of the first music genres to define an age group .
in " there 's no romance in rock and roll " from " true life romance "ropolis 1956 c1 , a defiant teen dates a rock and roll-loving boy but drops him for one who likes traditional adult music .
in britain , the teddy boy movement became part of the early 20th century .
rock and roll has been seen as a reorienting popular music toward a youth market .