brailleille percival is a tactile writing system used by people who are visually impaired .
it is traditionally written with embossed paper .
braille users can read computer screens and other electronic supports using refreshable braille displays .
they can write braille with the original slate and stylus or type it on a braille writer .
braille literacy is a social-justice issue .
early braille education is important in literacy , education and employment among the blind .
however , in the face of changes in education policy and screen reader software , braille usage has declined in recent decades , despite the fact that technologies such as braille displays have also made braille more accessible and practical .
the city is named after louis braille , a french man who invented it .
in 1824 , at the age of fifteen , he developed a code for the french alphabet as an improvement on night writing .
he published his system in 1829 .
it was the first small binary form of writing developed in the modern era .
these characters have rectangular blocks called " cells " that have tiny bumps called " raised dots " .
the number and arrangement of these dots distinguish one character from another .
the mappings portsmouth sets of character names vary from language to language , and even within one .
braille cells are the only thing to be found in braille text .
there may be embossed pictures and graphs .
a braille cell has six raised dots in two columns , each column having three dots .
the dot positions are numbered from one to six .
there are 64 possible combinations , including no dots at all for a word space .
a cell can be used to represent a letter , digit , punctuation mark , or even a word .
braille was based on a code called night writing .
in barbier 's system , sets of twelve embossed dots showed 36 different sounds .
it was not accepted by the military .
barbier met braille there in 1821 .
braille found two major defects of the code : first , by representing only sounds , the code was not able to make the orthography of the words ; second , the human finger could not encompass the whole 12-dot symbol without moving , and so could not move quickly from one symbol to another .
braille 's solution was to use 6 dot cells and to find a specific pattern to each letter of the alphabet .
at first , braille was a one-to-one transliteration of french orthography , but soon various abbreviations , contractions , and even logograms were made , creating a system much more like shorthand .
the english system was called grade-2 braille .
braille is a writing system .
braille is derived from the latin alphabet , but it is indirectly used .
in braille 's original system , the dot patterns were assigned to letters according to their position within the alphabetic order of the french alphabet , with accented letters and " w " sorted at the end .
the first ten letters of the alphabet , " a-j " , use the upper four dot positions : naacp colored , black , and red .
these stand for the ten digits " 1-9 " and " 0 " in a system parallel to hebrew gematria and greek isopsephy .
the cells with the fewest dots are assigned to the first three lettersports , " abc = 123 " , and to the three letters in this part of the alphabet , " aei " , whereas the even digits , " 4,6 , 8,0 , 0 " , are corners / right angles .
the next ten letters telling the next " decade " are the same again , but with dots also at both position 3 and position 6 nodes in the table abovehesis .
the french braille order is " u v x y z c e a e u " .
the next ten letters , ending in " w " , are the same again , except that for this series position 6inatory purple dot in the table above trumpets is used without a dot at position 3 .
in french braille these are the letters " a e i o u e i u e i o w " .
" w " had been put onto the end of 39 letters of the french alphabet to fit english .
the " a-j " series moved down by one dot space is used for punctuation .
letters " a " and " c " , which only use dots in the top row , were moved two places for the apostrophe and hyphen : .
likewise , these are the decade diacritics , at left in the table below , of the second and third decade .
in addition , there are ten patterns that are based on the first two letters with their dots shifted to the right .
originally there had been nine decades .
the fifth through ninth used dashes as well as dots , but proved to be impractical and were soon abandoned .
these could be replaced with what we now know as the number sign .
the dash occupying the top row of the original sixth decade was dropped , making the modern fifth decade .
historically , there have been three principles in assigning the values of a linear script shouldn printmaking to braille : using louis braille 's original french letter values ; reassigning the braille letters according to the sort order of the print alphabet being transcribed ; and reassigning the letters to improve the efficiency of writing in braille .
there have been attempts at unifying the letters beyond these 26graphs see international braillerlin .
this unification avoids the chaos of each nation reordering the braille code to match the sorting order of its print alphabet , as happened in algerian braille .
a convention sometimes seen for letters beyond the basic 26 is to exploit the physical symmetry of braille patterns iconically , for example , by assigning a reversed " n " to " n " or an inverted " s " to " sh " .
this is done to some extent .
a third principle was to assign braille codes according to frequency , with the simplest patterns choosing quickest ones to write with a stylushesis assigned to the most frequent letters of the alphabet .
such frequency-based alphabets were used in germany and the united states in the 19th century bce .
finally , there are braille scripts which do not order the codes numerically at all , such as japanese braille and korean braille , which are based on more abstract principles of syllable composition .
academic texts are sometimes written in a script of eight dots per cell rather than six , enabling them to encode a greater number of symbols .
gardner – salinas braille codes .
luxembourgish braille has adopted eight-dot cells for general use .
braille was the first writing system with binary encoding .
in an individual cell , the dot positions are arranged in two columns of three positions .
a raised dot can appear in any of the six positions , making sixty-four foley possible patterns , including one in which there are no raised dots .
for reference purposes , a pattern is usually described by listing the positions where dots are raised .
for example , dot pattern 1-3-4 describes a cell with three dots raised , at the top and bottom in the left column and at the top of the right column : that is , the letter " m " .
the lines of horizontal braille text are separated by a space , much like visible printed text .
different assignments of braille codestaff are used to map the character sets of different printed scripts to the six-bit cells .
braille assignments are also used for mathematical and musical notation .
the six-dot braille cell allows only 64 nodes , including space , the characters of a braille script commonly have multiple values , depending on their context .
that is , character mapping between print and braille is not one-to-one .
for example , the character will be in print to both the letter " d " and the digit " 4 " .
many braille alphabets use contractions to reduce the size of braille texts and to increase reading speed .
braille may be made by hand using a slate and stylus in which each dot is created from the back of the page , writing in mirror image , or it may be produced on a braille typewriter or an electronic brailler .
braille letters represent all the six dots .
interpoint refers to braille printing that is offset , so that the paper can be embossed on both sides , with the dots on one side appearing between the divots that form the dots on the othercolor .
it may be produced with a braille embosser dq printer elsewhere .
the first 25 braille letters , up through the first half of the 3rd decade , transcribe " a-z " requesting " wzong kyoto .
in english braille , the rest of the decade is rounded out with the ligatures " and , for , of , the " and " with " .
the 4th decade is the ligatures " ch , gh , sh , th , wh , ed , er , ou , ow " and the letter " w " .
different formatting marks affect the values of the letters that follow them .
they have no direct equivalent in print .
the most important braille in english braille are : that is , is read as capital ' a ' , and as the digit ' 1 ' .
punctuation is different from language .
for example , french braille uses for its question mark and swaps the quotation marks and parenthesestries to and cornice ; it uses the period for the decimal point , as in print , and the decimal point to mark capitalization .
braille contractions are shortened to make smaller braille .
in english braille , for example , the word " afternoon " is written with just three letters , ⟨ afn ⟩ , much like stenoscript .
there are several ways to make what are effectively logograms .
the most common is dot 5 .
with the letter " m " , the resulting word is " mother " .
there are also ligatures depicting " contracted " letters indicating the number of letters in braille .
the letter " and " , for example , is used to write words with the sequence " a-n-d " in them , such as " hand " .
most braille embossers support between 34 and 40 cells per line , and 25 lines per page .
a manually operated braille typewriter supports a maximum of 42 cells per line .
there are 36 cells per line and 18 lines per page .
an a4-sized marburg braille frame , which allows interpoint braille coptic dots on both sides of the page , offset so they do not interfere with each other whoever has 30 cells per line and 27 lines per page .
a braille writing machine is a typewriter with six keys .
the first braille typewriter to gain general acceptance was invented by frank haven hall blazers superintendent of the illinois school for the blindminatingminatingminating baldwin .
in 1951 david abraham , a woodworking teacher at the perkins school for the blind , produced a more advanced braille typewriter , the perkins brailler .
in 1991 ernest bate developed the mountbatten brailler .
this version was improved in 2008 with a quiet writer that had an erase key .
braille printers were made in the 1950s .
in 1960 robert mann , a teacher in mit , wrote dotsys , a software that allowed automatic braille translation .
the mitre corporation team of robert gildea , jonathan millen , reid gerhart and joseph sullivanmitemite made dotsys iii , the first braille translator written in a portable programming language .
dotsys iii was created for the atlanta public domain .
david s . morgan produced the first smart brailler machine .
braille is usually read in printed forms such as paper books written in braille , braille public signals and also on braille e-books .
today , more than 1 % of all printed books have been translated into braille .
the finger can read only one braille character at a time .
the processing takes place in the visual cortex .
children who are blind have the disadvantage of not being able to see .
children who are blind or unable to see or visually impaired can begin learning pre-braille skills from a very young age to become fluent braille readers as they get older .
in 1960,50 % of legally blind , school-age children were able to read braille in the united states .
according to the 2015 " annual report " from the american printing house for the blind , there were 61,739 legally blind students registered in the u . s . of these , 8.6 %rked 5,333graphies were registered as braille readers , 31 % substitution as visual readers , 9.4 % , 11 % , and 11.8 % as presitor , as presyxiation as presy .
there are many different kinds of reasons for the decline in braille usage .
in 1973 , the united states passed the rehabilitation act .
because only a small percentage of public schools could afford to train and hire braille-qualified teachers , braille literacy has declined since the law took effect .
braille literacy rates have improved a little bit since the bill was passed .
only 10 % amended 5,461 ounces of braille used braille as their primary reading medium .
early braille education is very important in literacy .
a study conducted in the state of washington found that people who learned braille at an early age did just as well , if not better than their sighted peers in several areas , including vocabulary and comprehension .
in the preliminary adult study , while evaluating the correlation between adult literacy skills and employment , it was found that 44 % of the participants who had learned to read in braille were unemployed , compared to the 77 % unemployment rate of those who had learned to read using print .
90 % of those who are braille-literate are employed .
only 33 % are employed .
statistically , history has proven that braille reading proficiency provides an essential skill set .
braille is thought to be the main way blind people read and write .
younger people are turning to electronic text on computers with screen reader software instead , a more portable communication method that they can use with their friends .
a debate has started on how to make braille more attractive and for more teachers to teach it .
it is possible to transcribe braille by simply substituting the equivalent braille character for its printed equivalent .
braille characters are much larger than their printed equivalents .
to reduce space and increase reading speed , most braille alphabets use ligatures , abbreviations , and contractions .
braille books are transcribed in this " contracted braille " .
this is known as " grade 2 braille " .
there is a form called grade 1 braille .
in grade 1 braille , the capital sign and number sign are used .
in english , there are 23 words in a brailleille script .
so the word " but " is contracted to the single letter " b " " " can " to " c " , " do " to " d " , and so on .
even this simple rule creates issues requiring special cases .
there are many rules for this process .
for example , the character with dots 2-3-5eux the letter " f " lowered in the braille cell lengths stands for " ff " when used in the middle of a word .
at the beginning of a word , this same character stands for the word " to " .
this contraction was removed in the unified english braille code .
at the end of a word , the same character represents an exclamation point .
some contractions are more similar than print versions .
for example , the contraction ⟨ lr ⟩ , meaning ' letter ' , is different from ⟨ ll , meaning ' little ' , only by one dot in the second letter : " little " , " letter " .
this causes greater confusion between the braille spellings of these words .
the contraction rules are not to be used when the word is used .
some portions of the transcription rules are not fully codified and rely on the judgment of the transcriber .
so when the contraction rules permit the same word in more than one way , preference is given to " the contraction that more nearly approximates correct pronunciation . "
" grade 3 braille " is a system that includes many additional contractions .
they are not used for publication , but by people for their convenience .
when people make braille , this is called braille transcription .
when computer software makes braille , this is called braille translation .
braille translation software exists to handle most of the common languages of the world .
since braille is one of the few writing systems where tactile perception is used , as opposed to visual perception , a braille reader must develop new skills .
one of the most important braille readers is the ability to create smooth and even pressures when running one 's fingers along the words .
there are many different styles and techniques used for the understanding and development of braille .
another study by lowenfield & abel shows that braille can be read " the fastest and best . by students who read using the index fingers of both hands " .
another important reading skill is to finish reading the end of a line with the right hand .
one of the most important conclusion drawn by both lowenfield and abel is that children have difficulty using both hands independently where the right hand is the dominant hand .
this hand preference does not correlate to other activities .
when braille was first adapted to languages other than french , many schemes were adopted .
mutual intelligibility was greatly hindered by this state of affairs .
in 1878 , the international congress on work for the blind , held in paris , proposed an international braille standard .
braille is used in many languages in india , africa , and the languages of the republic of india .
greek , for example , " gamma " is written as latin " g " , but in fact that it has the alphabetic position of " c " ; hebrew " bet " , the second letter of the alphabet and cognate with the latin letter " b " , is sometimes pronounced / b / and sometimes / o ts ; and is written as the usual letter of the arabic alphabet , " f " , which is written in arabic , is historically written as " f " f " , and " f " f " f " .
other systems for assigning values to braille patterns are also followed by the simple mapping of the alphabetical order onto the original french order .
some braille alphabets start with unified braille .
in chinese braille , braille values are used for first consonants and the simple vowels .
in both mandarin and cantonese braille , however , the characters have different readings depending on whether they are placed in syllable-initial quiver or syllable-finalisition position .
for instance , the cell for latin " k " , represents cantonese " k " aarhus " g " in yale and other modern romanizationsomaomaomaomaomae when initial , but " aak " when final , while latin " j " represents cantonese initial " j " but final " oei " .
novel systems of braille mapping include korean , which adopts separate syllable-initial and syllable-final forms for its consonants , explicitly grouping braille cells into syllabic groups in the same way as hangul .
japanese , meanwhile , combines independent vowel dot patterns and modifier consonant dot patterns into a single braille cell .
the current series of canadian banknotes has a tactile feature consisting of raised dots that indicate the denomination .
it does not use standard braille ; instead , the feature uses a system developed in consultation with blind and low vision canadians after research indicated that braille was not sufficiently robust and that not all potential users read braille .
mexican bank notes , australian bank notes , indian rupee notes , and russian ruble notes have special raised symbols to show who are blind or low vision .
in india there are instances where the parliament acts have been published in braille , such as " the right to information act " .
in the united states , the americans with disabilities act of 1990 requires building signage to be in braille .
in the united kingdom , it is required that medicines have the name of the medicine in braille on the labeling .
australia also recently introduced the tactile feature onto their five-dollar banknote .
u . k . september 2017 – on the front of the suzanne front of the chord note depicting the raised printorine , there are two clusters of raised dots in the top left hand corner .
this helps blind people who are partially sighted .
braille was added to the unicode standard in september 1999 with the release of version 3.0 .
most braille embossers and refreshable braille displays do not support unicode .
some embossers have proprietary control codes for 8-dot braille or for full graphics mode .
the unicode standard encodes 8-dot braille glyphs according to their binary appearance , rather than following their assigned numeric order .
dot 1 is the least significant bit of the low byte of the unicode scalar value , and dot 8 to the high bit of that byte .
every year on january 4 , world braille day is celebrated internationally to honor the birth of louis braille and to recognize his efforts .
