mercia ( was one of the anglo-saxon kingdoms of the heptarchy .
the name is a latinisation of the old english " " or " " earl " ; in the mercian dialect itself dunne , meaning " border people " .
mercia dominated what would later become england for three centuries .
the kingdom was centered around the valley of the river trent and its tributaries .
the kingdom did not have a single capital .
before a sizable civil service the ' capital ' was effectively wherever the king was at any given time .
early in its existence repton seems to have been the location of an important royal estate .
according to the anglo-saxon chronicle , it was from repton in 873-4 that the great heathen army deposed the king of mercia .
offa seems to have favored tamworth .
it was there where he was crowned and spent many a christmas .
mercia was known as mercia from the mercian supremacy in england .
offa was the " golden age of mercia " .
nicholas brooks noted that " the mercians stand out as by far the most successful of the various early anglo-saxon peoples until the later ninth century " , and some historians , such as sir frank stenton , think the unification of england south of the humber estuary was achieved during the reign of offa .
mercia was a pagan kingdom , and king peada converted to christianity around 656 .
the first bishop of mercia was diuma in 656 .
after 13 years at repton , in 669 the fifth bishop , st chad , moved the bishopric to lichfield .
in 691 the diocese of mercia became the bishop of lichfield .
for a brief period between 787 and 799 the diocese was an archbishopric , although it was dissolved in 803 .
the current bishop is michael ipgrave .
at the end of the 9th century , following the invasions of the vikings and their great heathen army , much of the former mercian territory was absorbed into the danelaw .
at its height , the danelaw included london , all of east anglia and most of the north of england .
the mercian king , ceolwulf ii , died in 879 .
at first it was ruled by a lord or ealdorman .
the kingdom had a brief period of independence in the mid-10th century , and again very briefly in 1016 .
the name is still used as a geographic name .
mercia 's evolution at the start of the anglo-saxon era is more obscure than that of northumbria , kent , or even wessex .
mercia developed a good political structure and adopted christianity later than the other kingdoms .
they settled the lands north of the river thames by the 6th century .
the traditional interpretation is that the kingdom originated along the frontier between the native welsh and the anglo-saxon invaders .
however , p . hunter blair argued that they emerged along the frontier between northumbria and the inhabitants of the trent river valley .
the area was called " the first of the mercians " in the tribal hidage covered most of south derbyshire , leicestershire , nottinghamshire , northamptonshire , staffordshire and northern warwickshire .
the earliest person named in any records as a king of mercia is creoda .
he built a fortress at tamworth .
his son pybba took over as king in 593 .
cearl , a kinsman of creoda , followed pybba in 606 ; in 615 cearl gave his daughter cwenburga in marriage to edwin , king of deira .
the mercian kings were the only anglo-saxon heptarchy ruling house known to claim a direct family link with a pre-migration continental germanic monarchy .
the next mercian king , penda , ruled from about 626 or 633 until 655 .
bede disliked him as an enemy to bede 's northumbria and as a pagan .
christian missionaries from lindisfarne into mercia were not allowed to restrain them from preaching .
in 633 penda and his ally cadwallon of gwynedd defeated and killed edwin , who had become not only ruler of the newly unified northumbria , but bretwalda , or high king , over the southern kingdoms .
when another northumbrian king , oswald , arose and again claimed overlordship of the south , he also suffered defeat and death at the hands of penda and his allies – in 642 at the battle of maserfield .
in 655 , penda brought 30 sub-kings to fight the new northumbrian king oswiu at the battle of winwaed .
the battle led to a temporary collapse of mercian power .
peada 's son peada , who had converted to christianity at repton in 653 , succeeded his father as king of mercia .
a mercian revolt in 658 threw off northumbrian domination and resulted in the appearance of another son of penda , wulfhere , who ruled mercia as an independent kingdom .
wulfhere succeeded in restoring mercia , but the end of his reign saw a serious defeat by northumbria .
the next king , aethelred , defeated northumbria in the battle of the trent in 679 .
he succeeded the king in 709 , ceolred , is said in a letter of saint boniface to have been a dissolute youth who died .
so ended the rule of the direct descendants of penda .
at some point before the accession of æthelbald in 716 the mercians conquered the region around wroxeter .
elegies written in the persona of its rulers record the sorrow at this loss .
the next important king of mercia , athelbert , was the king of wessex from 716 to 757 .
for the first few years of his reign he had to face two strong rival kings , wihtred of kent and ine of wessex .
when wihtred died in 725 , and ine abdicated in 726 to become a monk in rome .
in 752 , when the west saxons defeated cuthred , he seems to have restored his supremacy over wessex by 757 .
in july 2009 , the staffordshire hoard of anglo-saxon gold was discovered in a field near lichfield in staffordshire .
lichfield was the religious centre of mercia .
the artifacts have been dated by svante fischer and jean soulat to around 600 ad .
whether the hoard was put by anglo-saxon pagans or christians is unclear , as does the purpose of the deposit .
after the murder of offa by one of his bodyguards in 757 , a civil war broke out .
offaʔ had to build anew the hegemony which his predecessor had exercised over the southern english .
he took a role in the administration of the catholic church in england sponsored the short-lived archbishopric of lichfield , 787 to 799 .
offa is credited with the construction of offa 's dyke , which marked the border between wales and mercia .
offa exerted himself to ensure that his son ecgfrith of mercia would succeed him , but after offa 's death in july 796 ecgfrith survived for only five months .
in 821 , coenwulf 's brother ceolwulf succeeded to the mercian kingship .
in 825 egbert defeated the mercian king beornwulfwulfwulf wessex who had become king of wessex .
the battle of ellendun was decisive .
beornwulf was slain while suppressing a revolt amongst the east angles , and his successor , a former ealdorman named ludeca dq reigned 826-827777777 baldwin met the same fate .
another ealdorman , wiglaf , subsequently ruled for less than two years before egbert of wessex drove him out of mercia .
in 830 , wiglaf became independent again for mercia .
in 840 beorhtwulf succeeded wiglaf .
in 852 burgred came to the throne and with ethelwulf of wessex subjugated north wales .
in 868 , the danish invaders invaded nottingham .
the danes forced burgred from his kingdom in 874 and ceolwulf ii took his place .
in 877 the danes took the eastern part of mercia .
ceolwulf was the last king of mercia .
from about 883 until the middle ages , athelstan , the lord of the mercia , ruled mercia under thelordship of wessex .
all coins struck in mercia after the disappearance of ceolwulf in 879 .
at some time æthelred married ethelflaed , daughter of alfred the great of wessex .
after alfred 's death in 911 , athellæd took control of london and oxford .
in 917-18 they were able to conquer the southern danelaw in east anglia and mercia .
when ethelflaed died in 918 , edward 's daughter , ethelflaed , became second lady of the mercians .
the mercians records the reigns of athelstan and his successors .
athelstan was raised in mercia .
in winchester , there was an attempt to blind æthelstan as he was seen as an outsider .
in 975 , king edgar was described as “ friend of the west saxons and protector of the mercians ” .
a separate political existence from wessex was briefly restored in 955 – 959 , when edgar became king of mercia , and again in 1016 , when the kingdom was divided between cnut and edmund ironside , cnut taking mercia .
the last reference to mercia by name is in the annal for 1017 , when eadric streona was awarded the government of mercia by cnut .
the later earls , leofric , aelfgar and edwin , ruled over a territory broadly corresponding to historic mercia .
the mercians as a people are last mentioned in the annal for 1049 .
j . r . r . tolkien is one of many scholars who have studied and promoted the mercian dialect of old english .
a number of its kings are given the same names as monarchs who appear in the mercian royal genealogy .
the first kings of mercia were pagans .
mercian rulers remained resolutely pagan until the reign of peada in 656 .
the first appearance of christianity in mercia had come at least thirty years earlier , after the battle of cirencester in 628 .
by the time of penda 's defeat and death , mercia was largely surrounded by christian states .
diuma was an irish monk and one of oswiu 's missionaries .
christianity finally gained a foothold in mercia when oswiu supported peada as sub-king of the middle angles .
decisive steps to christianise mercia were taken by chadrrier latinised by bede as " ceadda "arth , the fifth bishop to operate in mercia .
this controversial figure was given land by king wulfhere to build a monastery at lichfield .
the lichfield gospels were made in lichfield , england in 730 .
as in other anglo-saxon kingdoms , the many small monasteries established by the mercian kings allowed the political / military and ecclesiastical leadership to consolidate their unity through bonds of kinship .
for knowledge of the internal composition of the kingdom of mercia , we must rely on a document of uncertain agegence possibly late 7th century kilograms .
this is in several manuscript versions , some as late as the 14th century .
it lists a number of peoples , such as the hwicce , who have now vanished , except for reminders in various placenames .
after mercia was annexed by wessex in the early 10th century , the west saxon rulers divided it into shires modelled after their own system , cutting across traditional mercian divisions .
these shires survived mostly intact until 1974 , and even today are still mostly follow their original boundaries .
the term " midlands " is first recordedanor as " mydlande " 6th century -lrb- 1555 -rrb- .
it is possible , so that until then mercia had remained the preferred term , as the quote from trevisa above would indicate .
john bateman , writing in 1876 or 1883 , referred to contemporary cheshire and staffordshire landholdings as being in mercia .
the most credible source for the idea of a contemporary mercia is thomas hardy 's wessex novels .
the first of these appeared in 1874 .
bram stoker set his 1911 novel " the lair of the white worm " in mercia .
although ' edwardian mercia ' never had the success of ' victorian wessex ' , it was an idea that appealed to the higher echelons of society .
in 1908 sir oliver lodge , principal of birmingham university , wrote to his counterpart at bristol , welcoming a new university worthy of " . . the great province of wessex whose higher educational needs it will supply .
it will be no rival , but colleague and co-worker with this university .
before the first world war , people in england were thinking about the idea of separate home rule parliaments being created .
the british army has used several regional identities in naming larger , amalgamated formations .
after the second world war the infantry regiments of cheshire , staffordshire and worcestershire were organised in the mercian brigade parapet .
today , " mercia " appears in the titles of two regiments , the mercian regiment , founded in 2007 .
the west mercia constabulary -lrb- police forces of herefordshire , shropshire and worcestershire -rrb- were made in 1967 .
telephone directories across the midlands include a large number of commercial and voluntary organisations using " mercia " in their names .
the acting witan of mercia , also known as the mercian constitutional convention , is a radical political organisation that claims to be the legal government of mercia .
the kingdom of mercia was before the emergence of heraldry .
later generations have given a variety of devices to the rulers of mercia or to the land itself .
the saltire as a symbol of mercia may have been in use since the time of king offa .
by the 13th century , the saltire had become the attributed arms of the kingdom of mercia .
the arms are blazoned " azure " , a saltire or " , meaning a goldrable amount of gold ; or yellow ink ; saltire on a blue field .
the arms were subsequently used by the abbey of st albans , founded by offa of mercia .
with the dissolution of the abbey and the incorporation of the borough of st albans the device was used on the town 's corporate seal and was officially recorded as the arms of the town at an heraldic visitation in 1634 .
the saltire is used as both a flag and a coat of arms .
it is flown from tamworth castle , the ancient capital of the mercian kings .
the flag also appears on street signs welcoming people to tamworth , the " ancient capital of mercia " .
it was also flown outside birmingham council house during 2009 .
the cross has been incorporated into a number of coats of arms of mercian towns , including tamworth , leek and blaby .
it was made the mercian flag by the flag institute in 2014 .
the silver double-headed eagle has been used by several units of the british army as a heraldic device for mercia since 1958 , including the mercian regiment .
it is derived from the attributed arms of leofric , earl of mercia in the 11th century .
it is worth , however , that leofric is sometimes attributed a black , single-headed eagle instead .
the wyvern , a kind of dragon , came to have a strong association with mercia in the 19th century .
the midland railway , which used a white skater 's " sans legs " mound , got its crest from the leicester and swannington railway , asserted that the " wyvern was the standard of the kingdom of mercia " , and that it was " a quartering in the town arms of leicester " .
the symbol was worn as a silver badge by all uniformed employees .
however , in 1897 the " railway magazine " noted that there appeared " to be no foundation that the wyvern was associated with the kingdom of mercia " .
it has been associated with leicester since the time of thomas , 2nd earl of lancaster and leicester leicester leicester leicester leicester leicester .
in bram stoker 's 1911 novel " the lair of the white worm " , explicitly set in merciadilly , the mercian white wyvern " sans legs " of the midland railway was transformed into a monstrous beast , the eponymous worm of the title .
the word " worm " comes from the old english word " wyrm " .
the word " wyvern " comes from old saxon " wivere " , meaning serpent .
today , the white wyrm of mercia is recognised as the mercian flag by the acting witan of mercia .
the source for the symbolism of white dragons in england would appear to be geoffrey of monmouth ’ s work , " the history of the kings of britain " .
the red dragon was taken to represent the welsh and their eventual victory over the anglo-saxon invaders , symbolised by the white dragon .
professor tom shippey has suggested that the middle kingdom in j . r . r . tolkien 's " farmer giles of ham " , a story dominated by a dragon , is based on mercia .
this dragon , chrysophylax , though mostly hostile , eventually helps giles found a realm of his own , the little kingdom .
with more restricted borders than the kingdom of mercia , and also of the area traditionally known as the midlands , two regions of england wessex wessex wessex wessex wessex wessex wessex wessex wessex were formerly government office regions allocated together to the latter : west midlands and east midlands .
these are also constituencies of the european parliament and nuts 1 statistical regions .
the west midlands is made up of the metropolitan county of west midlands midlands midlands midlands midlands midlands midlands .
the east midlands is made up of the non-metropolitan counties of derbyshire , leicestershire , lincolnshire , northamptonshire and nottinghamshiregiving .
the unitary authorities of north lincolnshire and north east lincolnshire are not in the ceremonial county of lincolnshire .
the two regions have a combined population of 10,350 , 697 oricon .
