the kingdom was centered around the valley of the river trent and its tributaries .
early in its existence repton seems to have been the location of an important royal estate .
according to the anglo-saxon chronicle , it was from repton in 873-4 that the great heathen army deposed the king of mercia .
nicholas brooks noted that " the mercians stand out as by far the most successful of the various early anglo-saxon peoples until the later ninth century " , and some historians , such as sir frank stenton , think the unification of england south of the humber estuary was achieved during the reign of offa .
for a brief period between 787 and 799 the diocese was an archbishopric , although it was dissolved in 803 .
the current bishop is michael ipgrave .
at the end of the 9th century , following the invasions of the vikings and their great heathen army , much of the former mercian territory was absorbed into the danelaw .
the kingdom had a brief period of independence in the mid-10th century , and again very briefly in 1016 .
the name is still used as a geographic name .
mercia 's evolution at the start of the anglo-saxon era is more obscure than that of northumbria , kent , or even wessex .
mercia developed a good political structure and adopted christianity later than the other kingdoms .
however , p . hunter blair argued that they emerged along the frontier between northumbria and the inhabitants of the trent river valley .
the earliest person named in any records as a king of mercia is creoda .
in 633 penda and his ally cadwallon of gwynedd defeated and killed edwin , who had become not only ruler of the newly unified northumbria , but bretwalda , or high king , over the southern kingdoms .
when another northumbrian king , oswald , arose and again claimed overlordship of the south , he also suffered defeat and death at the hands of penda and his allies – in 642 at the battle of maserfield .
peada 's son peada , who had converted to christianity at repton in 653 , succeeded his father as king of mercia .
a mercian revolt in 658 threw off northumbrian domination and resulted in the appearance of another son of penda , wulfhere , who ruled mercia as an independent kingdom .
wulfhere succeeded in restoring mercia , but the end of his reign saw a serious defeat by northumbria .
the next king , aethelred , defeated northumbria in the battle of the trent in 679 .
he succeeded the king in 709 , ceolred , is said in a letter of saint boniface to have been a dissolute youth who died .
at some point before the accession of æthelbald in 716 the mercians conquered the region around wroxeter .
elegies written in the persona of its rulers record the sorrow at this loss .
the next important king of mercia , athelbert , was the king of wessex from 716 to 757 .
for the first few years of his reign he had to face two strong rival kings , wihtred of kent and ine of wessex .
in 752 , when the west saxons defeated cuthred , he seems to have restored his supremacy over wessex by 757 .
in july 2009 , the staffordshire hoard of anglo-saxon gold was discovered in a field near lichfield in staffordshire .
the artifacts have been dated by svante fischer and jean soulat to around 600 ad .
whether the hoard was put by anglo-saxon pagans or christians is unclear , as does the purpose of the deposit .
he took a role in the administration of the catholic church in england sponsored the short-lived archbishopric of lichfield , 787 to 799 .
offa is credited with the construction of offa 's dyke , which marked the border between wales and mercia .
beornwulf was slain while suppressing a revolt amongst the east angles , and his successor , a former ealdorman named ludeca dq reigned 826-827777777 baldwin met the same fate .
another ealdorman , wiglaf , subsequently ruled for less than two years before egbert of wessex drove him out of mercia .
in 852 burgred came to the throne and with ethelwulf of wessex subjugated north wales .
the danes forced burgred from his kingdom in 874 and ceolwulf ii took his place .
from about 883 until the middle ages , athelstan , the lord of the mercia , ruled mercia under thelordship of wessex .
all coins struck in mercia after the disappearance of ceolwulf in 879 .
at some time æthelred married ethelflaed , daughter of alfred the great of wessex .
in 917-18 they were able to conquer the southern danelaw in east anglia and mercia .
athelstan was raised in mercia .
in winchester , there was an attempt to blind æthelstan as he was seen as an outsider .
in 975 , king edgar was described as “ friend of the west saxons and protector of the mercians ” .
a separate political existence from wessex was briefly restored in 955 – 959 , when edgar became king of mercia , and again in 1016 , when the kingdom was divided between cnut and edmund ironside , cnut taking mercia .
the last reference to mercia by name is in the annal for 1017 , when eadric streona was awarded the government of mercia by cnut .
the mercians as a people are last mentioned in the annal for 1049 .
j . r . r . tolkien is one of many scholars who have studied and promoted the mercian dialect of old english .
a number of its kings are given the same names as monarchs who appear in the mercian royal genealogy .
mercian rulers remained resolutely pagan until the reign of peada in 656 .
the first appearance of christianity in mercia had come at least thirty years earlier , after the battle of cirencester in 628 .
by the time of penda 's defeat and death , mercia was largely surrounded by christian states .
christianity finally gained a foothold in mercia when oswiu supported peada as sub-king of the middle angles .
decisive steps to christianise mercia were taken by chadrrier latinised by bede as " ceadda "arth , the fifth bishop to operate in mercia .
this controversial figure was given land by king wulfhere to build a monastery at lichfield .
the lichfield gospels were made in lichfield , england in 730 .
as in other anglo-saxon kingdoms , the many small monasteries established by the mercian kings allowed the political / military and ecclesiastical leadership to consolidate their unity through bonds of kinship .
for knowledge of the internal composition of the kingdom of mercia , we must rely on a document of uncertain agegence possibly late 7th century kilograms .
this is in several manuscript versions , some as late as the 14th century .
it lists a number of peoples , such as the hwicce , who have now vanished , except for reminders in various placenames .
after mercia was annexed by wessex in the early 10th century , the west saxon rulers divided it into shires modelled after their own system , cutting across traditional mercian divisions .
it is possible , so that until then mercia had remained the preferred term , as the quote from trevisa above would indicate .
the most credible source for the idea of a contemporary mercia is thomas hardy 's wessex novels .
the first of these appeared in 1874 .
bram stoker set his 1911 novel " the lair of the white worm " in mercia .
although ' edwardian mercia ' never had the success of ' victorian wessex ' , it was an idea that appealed to the higher echelons of society .
in 1908 sir oliver lodge , principal of birmingham university , wrote to his counterpart at bristol , welcoming a new university worthy of " . . the great province of wessex whose higher educational needs it will supply .
before the first world war , people in england were thinking about the idea of separate home rule parliaments being created .
today , " mercia " appears in the titles of two regiments , the mercian regiment , founded in 2007 .
the west mercia constabulary -lrb- police forces of herefordshire , shropshire and worcestershire -rrb- were made in 1967 .
telephone directories across the midlands include a large number of commercial and voluntary organisations using " mercia " in their names .
later generations have given a variety of devices to the rulers of mercia or to the land itself .
the saltire as a symbol of mercia may have been in use since the time of king offa .
by the 13th century , the saltire had become the attributed arms of the kingdom of mercia .
with the dissolution of the abbey and the incorporation of the borough of st albans the device was used on the town 's corporate seal and was officially recorded as the arms of the town at an heraldic visitation in 1634 .
the saltire is used as both a flag and a coat of arms .
it is flown from tamworth castle , the ancient capital of the mercian kings .
the flag also appears on street signs welcoming people to tamworth , the " ancient capital of mercia " .
it was made the mercian flag by the flag institute in 2014 .
the silver double-headed eagle has been used by several units of the british army as a heraldic device for mercia since 1958 , including the mercian regiment .
it is worth , however , that leofric is sometimes attributed a black , single-headed eagle instead .
the wyvern , a kind of dragon , came to have a strong association with mercia in the 19th century .
the midland railway , which used a white skater 's " sans legs " mound , got its crest from the leicester and swannington railway , asserted that the " wyvern was the standard of the kingdom of mercia " , and that it was " a quartering in the town arms of leicester " .
however , in 1897 the " railway magazine " noted that there appeared " to be no foundation that the wyvern was associated with the kingdom of mercia " .
in bram stoker 's 1911 novel " the lair of the white worm " , explicitly set in merciadilly , the mercian white wyvern " sans legs " of the midland railway was transformed into a monstrous beast , the eponymous worm of the title .
today , the white wyrm of mercia is recognised as the mercian flag by the acting witan of mercia .
the source for the symbolism of white dragons in england would appear to be geoffrey of monmouth ’ s work , " the history of the kings of britain " .
the red dragon was taken to represent the welsh and their eventual victory over the anglo-saxon invaders , symbolised by the white dragon .