george gershwinttered -lrb- september 26,1898 – july 11,1937 -rrb- was an american composer and pianist .
among his best-known works are the orchestral compositions " rhapsody in blue " egypt " ; and " an american in paris " ; the songs " swanee " ; 1919 – 1924 ; the songs " fascinating rhythm " ; the jazz standard " i got rhythm " ; and the opera " i got rhythm " ; and the 1935 hit " porgy and bess " .
gershwin studied the piano with charles hambitzer and composition with rubin goldmark , henry cowell , and joseph brody .
he began his career as a song plugger .
he moved to paris to study with nadia boulanger , but she refused him .
he returned to new york city to write his book " porgy and bess " with ira and dubose heyward .
it was a commercial failure but came to be considered one of the most important american operas of the twentieth century .
gershwin moved to hollywood and composed numerous movie scores until his death in 1937 from a malignant brain tumor .
his compositions have been adapted for use in movies and television .
gershwin was of ukrainian jewish and lithuanian jewish ancestry .
his grandfather , jakov gershowitz , was born in odessa .
moishe gershowitz 's son , moishe gershowitz , worked as a leather cutter for women 's shoes .
moishe gershowitz met roza bruskina , the teenage daughter of a furrier in vilnius .
she moved to new york city to live with her family .
moishe faced with compulsory military service if he remained in russia , moved to america as soon as he could afford to .
he changed his first name to morris .
she lived with her mother in brooklyn .
he was married to rose gershwine from 1895 until his death in 2006 .
their first child , ira gershwin , was born on december 6,1896 .
george gershwin was born on september 26,1898 in brooklyn , new york .
his birth certificate says that he was jacob gershwine , with the surname pronounced ' gersh-vin ' in the russian and yiddish immigrant community .
he had just one given name , contrary to the american practice of giving children a first and middle name .
he was named after his grandfather , a one-time russian army mechanic .
he changed the spelling of his surname to ' gershwin ' about the time he became a professional musician .
after ira and george gershwin gershwin gershwin gershwin gershwin gershwin gershwinjian -lrb- 1900 – 1981 -rrb- , and a girl frances gershwin gershwin gershwin gershwin gershwin gershwin gershwin gershwin gershwin gershwin gershwin gershwin gershwin gershwin gershwin gershwin gershwin gershwin gershwin gershwin gershwin gershwin gershwin gershwin gershwin gershwin gershwin gershwin gershwinjian -lrb- 1906-1999 -rrb- were born into the family .
the family lived in many different residences , as their father changed houses with each new enterprise in which he became involved .
they grew up around the yiddish theater district .
george and ira lived in the local yiddish theaters .
george lived a usual childhood life for children of new york tenements : running around with his boyhood friends , roller skating and misbehaving in the streets .
until 1908 , he cared nothing for music .
the sound captured him .
george 's parents bought a piano for lessons for his older brother ira , but to his parents ' surprise , and ira 's relief , it was george who spent more time playing it .
although his sister frances was the first in the family to make a living through her musical talents , she married young and devoted herself to being a mother and housewife .
she had given up her performing career .
george gershwin also became composer of songs , musicals , and short piano works .
with a degree of frustration , george tried various piano teachers for some two years gundam .
1911 finally being introduced to charles hambitzer by jack miller whereupon circa .
he was the pianist in the beethoven symphony orchestra .
he encouraged him to attend orchestral concerts .
in 1913 , gershwin left school at the age of 15 .
his employer was jerome h . remick and company , a detroit-based publishing firm with a branch office on new york city 's tin pan alley , and he earned $ 15 a week .
he was known for his first song " when you want ' em , you can ' t get ' em , when you 've got ' em , you don ’ t want ' em " .
he earned 50 cents .
in 1916 , george gershwin started working for the company .
he produced dozens , if not hundreds , of rolls under his own and assumed names gershwin 's attributed names gershwin include fred murtha and bert wynneux .
he also recorded rolls of his own compositions for the duo-art and welte-mignon reproducing pianos .
gershwin made a short foray into vaudeville .
his 1917 novelty ragtime " rialto ripples " was a success .
in 1919 , he scored his first big national hit with his song " swanee " .
he decided to sing it in one of his shows .
gershwin met the composer william daly in the late 1910s .
the two collaborated on the broadway musicals " piccadilly to broadway " ; 1920 – 1922 ; and jointly composed the score for " our nell " — 1923 – 1923 .
this was the beginning of a long friendship .
daly was a frequent arranger , orchestrator and conductor of gershwin 's music , and gershwin frequently turned to him for musical advice .
in 1924 , gershwin composed his first major classical work , " rhapsody in blue " , for orchestra and piano .
the music was designed by ferde grofe .
it went on to be his most popular work .
george gershwin often worked with the lyricist buddy desylva .
together they created the experimental one-act jazz opera " blue monday , " set in harlem .
it is regarded as a forerunner to the groundbreaking " porgy and bess " .
george gershwin and ira gershwin worked together on a stage musical comedy " lady be good " .
they followed this with " oh , kay ! "
she was known as " funny face " and " strike up the band " .
gershwin also allowed the song to be used as a football fight song .
in the mid-1920s , gershwin stayed in paris for a short period of time .
they were afraid that rigorous classical study would ruin his jazz-influenced style .
maurice ravel 's rejection letter to gershwin told him , " why become a second-rate ravel when you 're already a first-rate gershwin ? "
while there , gershwin wrote " an american in paris " .
it was performed at carnegie hall on december 13,1928 .
in 1929 , the gershwin brothers created " show girl " ; " girl crazy " performed 1930 , which introduced the standards " embraceable you " , debuted by ginger rogers , and " i got rhythm " ; and " of thee i sing " in 1931 , which was the first musical comedy to win the pulitzer prize .
his composition " porgy and bess " was considered a masterpiece by the composer of " rhapsody in blue " .
was it opera , or was it simply an ambitious broadway musical ?
' it crossed the barriers , ' per theater historian robert kimball .
' it was n't a musical work per se , and it was n't a drama per se .
but the work has always been outside category .
after the commercial failure of porgy and bess , gershwin moved to hollywood , california .
in 1936 , he was asked by rko pictures to write the music for the movie " shall we dance " .
gershwin 's extended score , which would marry ballet with jazz in a new way , runs over an hour in length .
it took gershwin several months to compose and orchestrate .
gershwin had a ten-year affair with composer kay swift .
she never married .
katharine weber , who was the granddaughter of george 's mother , suggested that the two men were not married .
" oh , kay " was named after her .
after gershwin 's death , swift arranged some of his music , transcribed several of his recordings , and collaborated with his brother ira on several projects .
in 1937 , gershwin began to complain of blinding headaches .
in 1937 , he performed his piano concerto in f in a special concert of his music with the san francisco symphony orchestra under the direction of french maestro pierre monteux .
gershwin was a superb pianist in his own compositions , but had coordination problems and blackouts during the performance .
he was at the time working on other hollywood movies while living with ira and his wife leonore in their rented house in beverly hills .
leonore gershwin began to be disturbed by george 's mood swings and he seemed to not eat without spilling food at the dinner table .
she suspected mental illness and insisted he be moved out of their house to lyricist yip harburg 's empty quarters nearby , where he was placed in the care of his valet , paul mueller .
the headaches and olfactory hallucinations continued .
gershwin died on the night of july 9,1937 in harburg 's house .
he was rushed to the hospital and was taken to the hospital .
he was suffering from a brain tumor .
leonore called him a close friend emil mosbacher .
mosbacher immediately called pioneering neurosurgeon harvey cushing in boston , who recommended dr . walter dandy , who was on a boat fishing in chesapeake bay with the governor of maryland .
mosbacher then called the white house and had a coast guard cutter sent to find the governor 's yacht and bring dandy quickly to shore .
by that time , gershwin 's condition was critical and the need for surgery was immediate .
gershwin died on the morning of sunday , july 11,1937 , at the age of 38 .
the fact that he had suddenly collapsed and become comatose after he stood up on july 9 , has been interpreted as brain herniation with duret haemorrhages .
gershwin 's friends and fans were shocked and devastated .
george gershwin died on july 11,1937 , but i don ’ t have to believe it if i don ’ t want to . "
he was buried at westchester hills cemetery in hastings-on-hudson , new york .
a memorial concert was held at the hollywood bowl on september 8,1937 , at which otto klemperer conducted his own orchestration of the second of gershwin 's " three preludes " .
gershwin was influenced by french composers in the early 20th century .
maurice ravel was impressed with gershwin 's abilities , commenting , " personally i find jazz most interesting : the rhythms , the way the melodies are handled , the melodies themselves .
i have heard of george gershwin 's works and i find them intriguing . "
the orchestrations in gershwin 's symphonic works often seem similar to those of ravel .
george gershwin asked to study with ravel .
when he heard how much gershwin earned , ravel said , " you should give me lessons . "
although the story was performed at the scene , stravinsky said that he originally heard the story from ravel .
gershwin 's " concerto in f " was very criticized for being related to the work of claude debussy .
the comparison did not deter him from continuing to explore french styles .
" an american in paris " is about the very journey that he had consciously taken as a composer : " the opening part will be developed in typical french style , in the manner of debussy and les six , though the tunes are original . "
gershwin was intrigued by the works of alban berg , dmitri shostakovich , igor stravinsky , darius milhaud , and arnold schoenberg .
he also asked schoenberg for composition lessons .
schoenberg said " i would only make you a bad schoenberg , and you 're such a good gershwin already . "
gershwin 's visit to france is very similar to one credited to maurice ravel during gershwin 's visit to france .
gershwin was very impressed by the music of berg , who gave him a score of the " lyric suite " .
he attended the american premiere of " wozzeck " conducted by leopold stokowski in 1931 .
gershwin 's music teacher of composition was very important in his life .
there has been some disagreement about the nature of schillinger 's influence on gershwin .
ira completely denied that his brother had any such assistance for this work .
gershwin 's third account of gershwin 's musical relationship with his teacher was written by george gershwin 's friend vernon duke , in an article for " the musical quarterly " in 1947 .
gershwin apart was known for his ability to manipulate forms of music into his own voice .
he took the jazz he discovered on tin pan alley into the mainstream .
george gershwin would not make grand statements about his music , but he believed that " true music must reflect the thought and aspirations of the people and time .
my people are americans .
my time is today .
in 2007 , the library of congress named their popular song after george gershwin .
the prize is given every year to a composer or performer whose lifetime contributions exemplify the standard of excellence associated with the gershwins .
on march 1,2007 , the first gershwin prize was awarded to paul simon .
gershwin made more than one hundred and forty-player piano rolls .
most were popular music of the period .
once his musical theatre-writing income became substantial , his regular roll-recording career became very difficult .
he had more rolls in the 1920s of his main hits for the aeolian company 's reproducing piano , including a complete version of his " rhapsody in blue " .
but the recordings are very popular .
his first recording was his own " swanee " with the fred van eps trio in 1919 .
the recorded balance is the banjo playing of van eps , and the piano is overshadowed .
the recording took place before " swanee " became famous as an al jolson specialty in early 1920 .
gershwin made a recording of " rhapsody in blue " with paul whiteman and his orchestra for the victor talking machine company in 1924 .
gershwin and the same orchestra made an electrical recording of the abridged version for victor in 1927 .
however , a dispute in the studio angered whiteman and he left .
the conductor 's baton was taken over by victor 's staff conductor nathaniel shilkret .
he made many solo piano recordings of songs from his musicals , including the vocals of fred and adele astaire , as well as his " three preludes " for piano .
in 1929 , gershwin supervised " the world premiere recording of " an american in paris " with nathaniel shilkret and the victor symphony orchestra .
gershwin 's role in the recording was rather limited , particularly because shilkret was conducting and had his own ideas about the music .
when it was realized that no one had been hired to play the brief celeste solo , gershwin was asked if he could and would play the instrument , and he agreed .
gershwin can be heard on the recording during the slow section .
gershwin appeared on several radio programs , including rudy vallee 's , and played some of his compositions .
this movement was the third movement of the " concerto in f " with vallee conducting the studio orchestra .
some of these performances have been preserved on transcription discs and have been released on lp and cd .
in 1934 , gershwin hosted his own radio program titled " music by gershwin " .
the show was on the nbc blue network from february to may and again in september through the final show on december 23,1934 .
he gave his own work as well as the work of other composers .
recordings from this and other radio broadcasts include his " variations on i got rhythm " , portions of the " concerto in f " , and numerous songs from his musical comedies .
he also recorded a run-through of his " second rhapsody " , conducting the orchestra and playing the piano solos .
gershwin had parts of the play " porgy and bess " with members of the original cast , conducting the orchestra from the keyboard .
in 1935 rca victor asked him to record some of his last recordings .
a 74-second newsreel movie clip of gershwin playing " i got rhythm " has survived .
there are also silent home movies of gershwin .
in addition , there is footage of gershwin playing " mademoiselle from new rochelle " and " strike up the band " on the piano during a broadway rehearsal of the 1930 production of " strike up the band " .
in the mid-30s , " strike up the band " was given to ucla as a football fight song , " strike up the band for ucla " .
the comedy team of clark and mccullough are seen conversing with gershwin , then singing as he plays .
in 1945 , the movie biography " rhapsody in blue " was made .
the movie also features many factual errors about gershwin 's life , but also features many examples of his music , including an almost complete performance of " rhapsody in blue " .
in 1965 , movietone records released an album called " george gershwin plays rhapsody in blue and his other favorite compositions " .
the b-side of the lp featured nine other recordings .
in 1975 , the columbia records released an album with gershwin 's piano rolls of " rhapsody in blue " .
the b-side of the columbia masterworks release features tilson thomas leading the new york philharmonic in " an american in paris . "
in 1976 , rca records released a collection of gershwin songs from 78s recorded in the 1920s .
" rhapsody in blue " was recorded with the paul whiteman orchestra and gershwin on piano ; " an american in paris " , from 1927 with gershwin on celesta ; and " three preludes " , " clap yo ' hands " and someone to watch over me " , among others .
the album has ten songs .
rhapsody in blue was performed in spectacular fashion by many pianists .
the soundtrack to woody allen 's 1979 movie " manhattan " is composed entirely of gershwin 's compositions , including " rhapsody in blue " , " love is sweeping the country " , and " but not for me " , performed by both the new york philharmonic under zubin mehta and the buffalo philharmonic under michael tilson thomas .
the movie begins with a monologue by allen : " he adored new york city . . to him , no matter what the season was , this was still a town that existed in black and white and pulsated to the great tunes of george gershwin . "
in 1993 , two audio cds with piano rolls by gershwin were issued by nonesuch records through the efforts of artis wodehouse , and entitled " " .
in 2009 , brian wilson was completing two unfinished compositions by george gershwin , released as " brian wilson reimagines gershwin " on august 17,2010 .
gershwin wrote original scores for the musicals and orchestral solo piano works .
gershwin died in the early days of his life .
the estate continues to collect significant royalties from licensing the copyrights on his work .
the estate supported the sonny bono copyright term extension act .
the copyrights on all gershwin 's solo works expired at the end of 2007 in the european union , based on its life-plus-70-years rule .
george gershwin was the wealthiest composer of all time .
in september 2013 , a partnership between ira and george gershwin and the university of michigan was created and will provide the university 's school of music , theatre , and dance access to gershwin 's entire body of work , which includes all of gershwin 's papers , drafts , and scores .
this direct access to all of his works will provide opportunities to musicians , composers , and scholars to analyze and reinterpret his work .
they will cover the 1924 jazz band version of " rhapsody in blue " , " an american in paris " and " porgy and bess " .
