gershwin studied the piano with charles hambitzer and composition with rubin goldmark , henry cowell , and joseph brody .
he moved to paris to study with nadia boulanger , but she refused him .
he returned to new york city to write his book " porgy and bess " with ira and dubose heyward .
it was a commercial failure but came to be considered one of the most important american operas of the twentieth century .
gershwin moved to hollywood and composed numerous movie scores until his death in 1937 from a malignant brain tumor .
moishe gershowitz 's son , moishe gershowitz , worked as a leather cutter for women 's shoes .
moishe gershowitz met roza bruskina , the teenage daughter of a furrier in vilnius .
moishe faced with compulsory military service if he remained in russia , moved to america as soon as he could afford to .
he changed his first name to morris .
he was married to rose gershwine from 1895 until his death in 2006 .
their first child , ira gershwin , was born on december 6,1896 .
george gershwin was born on september 26,1898 in brooklyn , new york .
his birth certificate says that he was jacob gershwine , with the surname pronounced ' gersh-vin ' in the russian and yiddish immigrant community .
he had just one given name , contrary to the american practice of giving children a first and middle name .
he was named after his grandfather , a one-time russian army mechanic .
he changed the spelling of his surname to ' gershwin ' about the time he became a professional musician .
george and ira lived in the local yiddish theaters .
george lived a usual childhood life for children of new york tenements : running around with his boyhood friends , roller skating and misbehaving in the streets .
george 's parents bought a piano for lessons for his older brother ira , but to his parents ' surprise , and ira 's relief , it was george who spent more time playing it .
although his sister frances was the first in the family to make a living through her musical talents , she married young and devoted herself to being a mother and housewife .
george gershwin also became composer of songs , musicals , and short piano works .
in 1913 , gershwin left school at the age of 15 .
his employer was jerome h . remick and company , a detroit-based publishing firm with a branch office on new york city 's tin pan alley , and he earned $ 15 a week .
he produced dozens , if not hundreds , of rolls under his own and assumed names gershwin 's attributed names gershwin include fred murtha and bert wynneux .
he also recorded rolls of his own compositions for the duo-art and welte-mignon reproducing pianos .
gershwin made a short foray into vaudeville .
maurice ravel 's rejection letter to gershwin told him , " why become a second-rate ravel when you 're already a first-rate gershwin ? "
while there , gershwin wrote " an american in paris " .
it was performed at carnegie hall on december 13,1928 .
in 1929 , the gershwin brothers created " show girl " ; " girl crazy " performed 1930 , which introduced the standards " embraceable you " , debuted by ginger rogers , and " i got rhythm " ; and " of thee i sing " in 1931 , which was the first musical comedy to win the pulitzer prize .
after the commercial failure of porgy and bess , gershwin moved to hollywood , california .
in 1936 , he was asked by rko pictures to write the music for the movie " shall we dance " .
gershwin 's extended score , which would marry ballet with jazz in a new way , runs over an hour in length .
it took gershwin several months to compose and orchestrate .
after gershwin 's death , swift arranged some of his music , transcribed several of his recordings , and collaborated with his brother ira on several projects .
in 1937 , he performed his piano concerto in f in a special concert of his music with the san francisco symphony orchestra under the direction of french maestro pierre monteux .
he was at the time working on other hollywood movies while living with ira and his wife leonore in their rented house in beverly hills .
leonore gershwin began to be disturbed by george 's mood swings and he seemed to not eat without spilling food at the dinner table .
she suspected mental illness and insisted he be moved out of their house to lyricist yip harburg 's empty quarters nearby , where he was placed in the care of his valet , paul mueller .
mosbacher immediately called pioneering neurosurgeon harvey cushing in boston , who recommended dr . walter dandy , who was on a boat fishing in chesapeake bay with the governor of maryland .
mosbacher then called the white house and had a coast guard cutter sent to find the governor 's yacht and bring dandy quickly to shore .
by that time , gershwin 's condition was critical and the need for surgery was immediate .
gershwin died on the morning of sunday , july 11,1937 , at the age of 38 .
the fact that he had suddenly collapsed and become comatose after he stood up on july 9 , has been interpreted as brain herniation with duret haemorrhages .
he was buried at westchester hills cemetery in hastings-on-hudson , new york .
a memorial concert was held at the hollywood bowl on september 8,1937 , at which otto klemperer conducted his own orchestration of the second of gershwin 's " three preludes " .
gershwin was influenced by french composers in the early 20th century .
maurice ravel was impressed with gershwin 's abilities , commenting , " personally i find jazz most interesting : the rhythms , the way the melodies are handled , the melodies themselves .
the orchestrations in gershwin 's symphonic works often seem similar to those of ravel .
when he heard how much gershwin earned , ravel said , " you should give me lessons . "
although the story was performed at the scene , stravinsky said that he originally heard the story from ravel .
gershwin 's " concerto in f " was very criticized for being related to the work of claude debussy .
the comparison did not deter him from continuing to explore french styles .
"
an american in paris " is about the very journey that he had consciously taken as a composer : " the opening part will be developed in typical french style , in the manner of debussy and les six , though the tunes are original . "
he also asked schoenberg for composition lessons .
schoenberg said " i would only make you a bad schoenberg , and you 're such a good gershwin already . "
gershwin 's visit to france is very similar to one credited to maurice ravel during gershwin 's visit to france .
gershwin was very impressed by the music of berg , who gave him a score of the " lyric suite " .
he attended the american premiere of " wozzeck " conducted by leopold stokowski in 1931 .
gershwin 's music teacher of composition was very important in his life .
ira completely denied that his brother had any such assistance for this work .
gershwin 's third account of gershwin 's musical relationship with his teacher was written by george gershwin 's friend vernon duke , in an article for " the musical quarterly " in 1947 .
gershwin apart was known for his ability to manipulate forms of music into his own voice .
george gershwin would not make grand statements about his music , but he believed that " true music must reflect the thought and aspirations of the people and time .
he had more rolls in the 1920s of his main hits for the aeolian company 's reproducing piano , including a complete version of his " rhapsody in blue " .
his first recording was his own " swanee " with the fred van eps trio in 1919 .
the recorded balance is the banjo playing of van eps , and the piano is overshadowed .
the recording took place before " swanee " became famous as an al jolson specialty in early 1920 .
gershwin made a recording of " rhapsody in blue " with paul whiteman and his orchestra for the victor talking machine company in 1924 .
gershwin and the same orchestra made an electrical recording of the abridged version for victor in 1927 .
however , a dispute in the studio angered whiteman and he left .
he made many solo piano recordings of songs from his musicals , including the vocals of fred and adele astaire , as well as his " three preludes " for piano .
in 1929 , gershwin supervised " the world premiere recording of " an american in paris " with nathaniel shilkret and the victor symphony orchestra .
gershwin 's role in the recording was rather limited , particularly because shilkret was conducting and had his own ideas about the music .
when it was realized that no one had been hired to play the brief celeste solo , gershwin was asked if he could and would play the instrument , and he agreed .
gershwin can be heard on the recording during the slow section .
gershwin appeared on several radio programs , including rudy vallee 's , and played some of his compositions .
this movement was the third movement of the " concerto in f " with vallee conducting the studio orchestra .
in 1934 , gershwin hosted his own radio program titled " music by gershwin " .
the show was on the nbc blue network from february to may and again in september through the final show on december 23,1934 .
he gave his own work as well as the work of other composers .
he also recorded a run-through of his " second rhapsody " , conducting the orchestra and playing the piano solos .
gershwin had parts of the play " porgy and bess " with members of the original cast , conducting the orchestra from the keyboard .
a 74-second newsreel movie clip of gershwin playing " i got rhythm " has survived .
in addition , there is footage of gershwin playing " mademoiselle from new rochelle " and " strike up the band " on the piano during a broadway rehearsal of the 1930 production of " strike up the band " .
the comedy team of clark and mccullough are seen conversing with gershwin , then singing as he plays .
the movie also features many factual errors about gershwin 's life , but also features many examples of his music , including an almost complete performance of " rhapsody in blue " .
in 1965 , movietone records released an album called " george gershwin plays rhapsody in blue and his other favorite compositions " .
in 1975 , the columbia records released an album with gershwin 's piano rolls of " rhapsody in blue " .
the b-side of the columbia masterworks release features tilson thomas leading the new york philharmonic in " an american in paris . "
rhapsody in blue " was recorded with the paul whiteman orchestra and gershwin on piano ; " an american in paris " , from 1927 with gershwin on celesta ; and " three preludes " , " clap yo ' hands " and someone to watch over me " , among others .
the soundtrack to woody allen 's 1979 movie " manhattan " is composed entirely of gershwin 's compositions , including " rhapsody in blue " , " love is sweeping the country " , and " but not for me " , performed by both the new york philharmonic under zubin mehta and the buffalo philharmonic under michael tilson thomas .
the movie begins with a monologue by allen : " he adored new york city . . to him , no matter what the season was , this was still a town that existed in black and white and pulsated to the great tunes of george gershwin . "
in 1993 , two audio cds with piano rolls by gershwin were issued by nonesuch records through the efforts of artis wodehouse , and entitled " " .
in 2009 , brian wilson was completing two unfinished compositions by george gershwin , released as " brian wilson reimagines gershwin " on august 17,2010 .
gershwin wrote original scores for the musicals and orchestral solo piano works .
gershwin died in the early days of his life .
the copyrights on all gershwin 's solo works expired at the end of 2007 in the european union , based on its life-plus-70-years rule .
in september 2013 , a partnership between ira and george gershwin and the university of michigan was created and will provide the university 's school of music , theatre , and dance access to gershwin 's entire body of work , which includes all of gershwin 's papers , drafts , and scores .
this direct access to all of his works will provide opportunities to musicians , composers , and scholars to analyze and reinterpret his work .