the lord of the rings is a book written by j . r . r . tolkien .
it was a sequel to " the hobbit " .
tolkien wrote the story between 1937 and 1949 .
the book is about the main antagonist of the story the dark lord sauron .
the story is from quiet beginnings in the shire , a hobbit land not unlike the english countryside .
tolkien wanted to be one book of a two-volume set , the other to be " the silmarillion " , but this idea was dismissed by his publisher .
it was published in three parts between 1954 and 1955 .
the three books in the book were called " the fellowship of the ring " , " the two towers " and " the return of the king " .
the novel is divided internally into six books , two per volume , with several appendices of background material included at the end .
some editions combine the entire work into a single volume .
" the lord of the rings " has been translated into 38 languages .
tolkien 's work has been studied many times .
although a major work in itself , the story was only the last movement of a larger epic tolkien worked on since 1917 .
influences on this earlier work , and on the story of " the lord of the rings " , include philology , mythology , religion and the author 's distaste for industrialization , as well as earlier fantasy works and tolkien 's experiences in world war i . " the lord of the rings " " , which is considered to have a dictionary of the english dictionary of tolkien 's use of the " tolkien 's " .
the popular use of " the lord of the rings " has led to many references in popular culture .
" the lord of the rings " has inspired , and continues to inspire , artwork , music , movies and television , video games , board games , and later literature .
award-winning " the lord of the rings " have been made for radio , theatre , and film .
in 2003 , it was named britain 's best novel of all time in the bbc 's the big read .
the one ring is set in the middle of the book , and is the one that is the most powerful of the time of the dark lord sauron .
sauron was defeated by an alliance of elves and men led by gil-galad and elendil .
in the final battle , elendil , the son of elendil , is killed by sauron .
isildur lost the ring as an heirloom for his line , but when he was ambushed and killed by the orcs , the ring was lost in the river anduin .
the ring was found by a folk of deagol .
his friend smeagol fell under the ring 's influence and strangled deagol to get it .
smeagol was banished and hid under the misty mountains .
the ring gave him a long life and changed him over a lot of years into a creature called gollum .
gollum lost the ring and his " precious " .
meanwhile , sauron took back his old realm of mordor .
when gollum sets out in search of the ring , he was captured and tortured by sauron .
sauron said that " baggins " of the shire had taken the ring .
gollum was set loose .
sauron , the king of the island , had to take over the ring and sent forth his servants , the nazgul , to seize it .
the story begins in the shire , where the hobbit frodo baggins inherits the ring from bilbo baggins , his cousin and guardian .
neither hobbit is aware of the ring 's nature , but gandalf the grey , a wizard and an old friend of bilbo , suspects it to be sauron 's ring .
he tells frodo that he is the king of the shire .
frodo 's cousins , meriadoc " merry " brandybuck and peregrin " pippin took took took .
they are nearly caught by the black riders .
there they are helped by tom bombadil , a strange and merry fellow who lives with his wife .
the hobbits reach the town of bree .
strider persuades the hobbits to take him on as their guide and protector .
together , they leave bree after another close escape from the black riders .
on the hill of weathertop , they are attacked by the black riders , who wound frodo with a cursed blade .
strider fights them off and leads the hobbits towards rivendell .
frodo falls unconscious because of the stab wound .
the black riders nearly capture him at the ford of bruinen .
frodo wakes up in rivendell .
elrond tells the story of sauron and the ring .
strider is revealed to be aragorn , isildur 's heir .
gandalf tells the wizard saruman who has betrayed them and is now working to become a power in his own right .
the council decides that the ring must be destroyed , but that can only be done by sending it to the fire of mount doom in mordor , where it was forged .
frodo takes this task .
elrond , with the advice of gandalf , chooses companions for him .
the fellowship of the ring is the leader of the land of gondor .
after a failed attempt to cross the misty mountains over the redhorn pass , the company take the path through the mines of moria .
they learn about the fate of balin and his dwarves .
after surviving an attack , they are pursued by orcs and by a balrog , an ancient fire demon .
gandalf faces the balrog , and both of them fall into the abyss .
the king and queen escape and find refuge in the elven forest of lothlorien .
they travel down the river anduin to the hill of amon hen .
boromir tries to take the ring from frodo , but frodo puts it on and disappears .
frodo decides to go alone to mordor , but sam thinks about what he intends and goes with him .
the fellowship of the orcs is a group of people who capture merry and pippin .
legolas , aragorn , gimli and legolas debate which pair of hobbits to follow .
they decide to pursue merry and pippin 's adventures to saruman .
the fellowship of the elves is the leader of the rohirrim .
merry and pippin escape into fangorn forest .
legolas , aragorn , legolas , and gimli go to fangorn .
there they meet the king , who is already there .
gandalf explains that he slew the balrog .
darkness took him , but he was sent back to middle-earth to complete his mission .
he is now gandalf the white , for he has taken saruman 's place as the chief of the wizards .
gandalf tells his friends that merry and pippin are well .
they go to edoras , the capital of rohan .
gandalf frees theoden , king of rohan .
theoden musters his fighting strength and rides with his men to the ancient fortress of helm 's deep , while gandalf departs to seek help from treebeard .
meanwhile , the ents , captured by merry and pippin , attack isengard , saruman 's stronghold , and trap the wizard in the tower of orthanc .
gandalf convinces treebeard to send an army of huorns to theoden 's aid .
gandalf brings an army of rohirrim to helm 's deep , and they defeat the orcs , who flee into the forest of huorns , never to be seen again .
gandalf offers a chance to turn away from evil .
when saruman refuses to listen , gandalf strips him of his rank and most of his powers .
after saruman crawls back to his prison , wormtongue drops a sphere to try to kill gandalf .
pippin picks up .
saruman is a " palantir " , a seeing-stone that saruman used to speak with sauron and through which saruman was ensnared .
pippin is seen by sauron .
gandalf , the chief city of gondor , takes pippin with him .
frodo and sam capture gollum , who has followed them from moria .
they force him to guide them to mordor .
gollum knows the black gate of mordor .
faramir resists the temptation to seize the ring .
gollum betrays frodo by leading him to the great spider shelob in the tunnels of cirith ungol .
frodo falls to shelob 's sting .
with the help of galadriel 's gifts , sam fights off the spider .
sam takes the ring to continue the quest .
sam hears them and learns that frodo is still alive .
sauron then started a war .
gandalf arrives at minas tirith to warn denethor of the attack .
minas tirith is besieged .
he falls into despair .
he burns himself alive on a pyre , nearly taking his son faramir with him .
aragorn , legolas , gimli and the rangers of the north , take the paths of the dead to recruit the dead men of dunharrow , who are bound by a curse which denies them rest until they fight for the king of gondor .
after aragorn , the army of the dead strikes terror into the corsairs of umbar invading southern gondor .
aragorn defeats the corsairs and uses their ships to transport the men of southern gondor up the anduin , reaching minas tirith just in time to turn the tide of battle .
theoden 's niece eowyn , who joined the army in disguise , slays the lord of the nazgul with help from merry .
together , gondor and rohan defeat sauron 's army in the battle of the pelennor fields .
theoden is killed .
sam rescues frodo from the tower of cirith .
they travel across mordor .
aragorn leads an army of men from gondor and rohan to march on the black gate to distract sauron from his true danger .
his army is vastly outnumbered by the great might of sauron .
frodo and sam reach the edge of the cracks of doom , but frodo resists the ring any longer .
he uses it for himself .
he bites off frodo 's finger with the ring .
gollum falls into the fire , taking the ring with him .
the ring is destroyed , and sauron loses his power forever .
all he created collapses , the nazgul perish , and his armies are thrown into such disarray that aragorn 's forces emerge victorious .
aragorn is crowned king of gondor .
the four hobbits go back to the shire , but they find that it has been taken over by men directed by one " sharkey " whom they later discover to be sarumaneux .
the hobbits get a rebellion and fight the shire .
frodo stops the hobbits from killing the wizard after saruman tries to stab frodo , but grima turns on saruman and kills him in front of bag end , frodo 's home .
the war of the ring comes to its true end on frodo 's doorstep .
merry and pippin are celebrated as heroes .
sam marries rosie cotton and uses his gifts from galadriel to help heal the shire .
but he is still wounded in body and spirit .
a few years later , in the company of bilbo and gandalf , frodo sails from the grey havens west over the sea to the undying lands to find peace .
in the appendices , sam gives elanor the " red book of westmarch " , which contains the story of bilbo 's adventures and the war of the ring as witnessed by the hobbits .
sam is said to have crossed west over the sea himself , the last of the ring-bearers .
some characters in " the lord of the rings " are fictional protagonists .
some of the villains have " good impulses " .
therefore the categorization of characters as either protagonists or ' antagonists ' below indicates their role in the story .
the book was a sequel to j . r . tolkien 's book " the hobbit " .
the success of " the hobbit " had led george allen & unwin , the publishers , to request a sequel .
tolkien warned them that he wrote quite slowly , and responded with several stories he had already developed .
allen & unwin thought more stories about hobbits would be popular .
so at the age of 45 , tolkien began writing the story that would become " lord of the rings . "
tolkien was 63 years old .
in 1937 , he started " a new hobbit " .
after several false starts , the story of the one ring was found .
the idea for the first chapter showed that the first chapter could be created by the people who were not the king of the rings was the reason behind bilbo 's disappearance , the significance of the ring , and the title " the lord of the rings " did not arrive until the spring of 1938 .
originally , he planned to write a story in which bilbo had used up all his treasure and was looking for another adventure to gain more .
as the story went , he also brought in elements from " the silmarillion " mythology .
writing was slow , because tolkien had a full-time academic position , and needed to earn more money as a university examiner .
tolkien stopped " the lord of the rings " during most of 1943 and only restarted it in april 1944 .
tolkien made another great effort in 1946 , and showed the manuscript to his publishers in 1947 .
the story was finished the next year , but tolkien did not complete the rest of the work until 1949 .
the first manuscripts , which total 9,250 pages , now are in the j . r . tolkien collection at marquette university .
the influence of the welsh language , which tolkien had learned , is summarized in his essay english and welsh : " if i may once more refer to my work .
the lord of the rings was a very important symbol in the story .
this element in the tale has given perhaps more pleasure to more readers than anything else in it .
tolkien 's books were about his interests in philology , religionecure , catholicismcturing , norse and general germanic mythology , and also celtic , greek , greek , and finnish mythology .
tolkien acknowledged , and external critics have verified , the influences of george macdonald and william morris and the anglo-saxon poem " beowulf " .
critics have argued that wagner 's " ring of the nibelungs " is not very important .
tolkien included neither religion nor cult in his work .
rather the themes , moral philosophy , and cosmology of " the lord of the rings " reflect his catholic worldview .
tolkien wrote that " the lord of the rings is of course a fundamentally religious and catholic work .
that is why i have not put in , or have cut out , practically all references to religion , to cults or practices , in the imaginary world .
for the religious element is absorbed into the story and the symbolism .
some locations and characters were inspired by tolkien 's childhood in birmingham , where he first lived near sarehole mill , and later near edgbaston reservoir .
there are also hints of the black country , which is within easy reach of northwest edgbaston .
this shows in such names as " underhill " , and the description of saruman 's industrialization of isengard and the shire .
it has also been suggested that the shire and its surroundings were based on the countryside around stonyhurst college in lancashire where tolkien frequently stayed during the 1940s .
the work was influenced by the effects of his military service during world war i .
the book was offered to collins in 1950 .
tolkien intended " the silmarillion " at this point showed that it was not enough to be published .
after milton waldman , his contact at collins , expressed the belief that " the lord of the rings " itself wanted cutting , tolkien eventually demanded that they publish the book in 1952 .
collins did not ; and so tolkien wrote to allen and unwin , saying " i would gladly consider the publication of any part of the stuff " , fearing his work would never see the light of day .
for publication , the book was divided into three volumes .
delays in making appendices , maps and especially an index led to the volumes being published later than originally hoped – on 29 november 1954 , on 11 november 1954 , and on 20 october 1955 in the united kingdom .
houghton mifflin published " the fellowship of the ring " on 21 october 1954 , " the two towers " on 21 april 1955 , and " the return of the king " on 5 january 1956 .
" the return of the king " was especially delayed due to tolkien revising the ending and preparing appendicesicesicesices which had to be left out because of space constraints .
tolkien did not like the title " the return of the king " , believing it gave away too much of the storyline , but he refused to give it to his publisher 's preference .
he suggested the title " the two towers " in a deliberately ambiguous attempt to link the unconnected books iii and iv .
tolkien was opposed to titles being given to each two-book volume , preferring instead the use of book titles : e . g . " the lord of the rings " : vol .
1 , " the ring sets out " and " the ring goes south " .
2 , " the treason of isengard " and " the ring goes east " ; vol .
3 , " the war of the ring " and " the end of the third age " .
after pressure from his publishers , tolkien first suggested the titles : vol .
one of the books , " the shadow grows " , vol .
2 , " the ring in the shadow " ; vol .
3 , " the war of the ring " or " return of the king " .
because the three-volume binding was so widely distributed , the work is often referred to as the " lord of the rings " trilogy .
tolkien made use of the term " trilogy " for the work though he did at other times consider this incorrect , as it was written and conceived as a single book .
tolkien also objected to this term as he thought it was a heroic romance .
the books were published under a profit-sharing agreement , which tolkien would not get an advance or royalties until the books had broken even , after which he would take a large share of the profits .
it has sold over 150 million copies in 2007 .
the book was published in the uk by allen & unwin until 1990 .
in the early 1960s donald a . wollheim , science fiction editor of the paperback publisher ace books , said that " the lord of the rings " was not protected in the united states under american copyright law because houghton mifflin , the us hardcover publisher , had neglected to copyright the work in the united states .
then , in 1965 ace books began to publish an edition , unauthorized by tolkien .
tolkien took issue with this .
grass-roots pressure from these fans became so great that ace books withdrew their edition and made a nominal payment to tolkien .
houghton mifflin became very popular .
tolkien wrote several textual revisions to produce a version of the book that would be published with his consent and establish an unquestioned us copyright .
this was the second edition of " the lord of the rings " , published in 1965 .
the first ballantine paperback edition was printed in october that year .
it was number one by december 4 , a position it held for eight weeks .
houghton mifflin editions after 1994 make more changes to tolkien , and corrections supervised by christopher tolkien , which resulted , after some initial glitches , in a computer-based unified text .
in 2004 , for the 50th anniversary edition , wayne g . hammond and christina scull , under supervision from christopher tolkien , studied and revised the text to eliminate as many errors and inconsistencies as possible .
the 2005 edition of the book had some corrections .
the 60th edition was added in 2014 .
several editions , notably the 50th anniversary edition , combine all three books into one book .
from 1988 to 1992 christopher tolkien published the surviving drafts of " the lord of the rings " , chronicling and illuminating with commentary the stages of the text 's development , in volumes 6 – 9 of his history of middle-earth series .
the four books in the series are " return of the shadow " , " the treason of isengard " , " the war of the ring " , and " sauron defeated " .
the novel has been translated into many languages .
tolkien , an expert in philology , examined many of these translations , and made comments on each that reflect both the translation process and his work .
tolkien wrote a " guide to the names in the lord of the rings " .
tolkien suggested that the english language for the westron of the original , the english language of the westmarch , was the same as the english translation of the westron .
reviews in many media have been , on the whole , highly positive and acknowledge tolkien 's literary achievement as a significant one .
the " sunday telegraph " described it as " among the greatest works of imaginative fiction of the twentieth century " .
the " sunday times " also added that " the lord of the rings " and " the hobbit " and those who are going to read them .
the " new york herald tribune " also seemed to have an idea of how popular the books would become .
w . h . auden , an admirer of tolkien 's writings , regarded " the lord of the rings " as a " masterpiece " , further stating that in some cases it outdid the achievement of john milton 's " paradise lost " .
" new york times " reviewer judith shulevitz said that tolkien 's " a high-minded belief in the importance of his mission as a literary preservationist , which turns out to be death to literature itself " .
critic richard jenkyns , in " the new republic " , said that the work was not psychological .
the character and the work itself are , according to jenkyns , " anemic , and lacking in fibre " .
even within tolkien 's literary group , the inklings , reviews were mixed .
hugo dyson gave a speech on the plane .
another inkling , c . s . lewis , had very different feelings , writing , " here are beauties which pierce like swords or burn like cold iron .
here is a book which will break your heart . "
despite these reviews and its lack of paperback printing until the 1960s , " the lord of the rings " sold well in hardback .
in 1957 , " the lord of the rings " was awarded the international fantasy award .
despite its many detractors , the publication of ace books and ballantine paperbacks helped " the lord of the rings " become very popular in the united states in the 1960s .
the book has remained so ever since .
in 2003 " big read " survey conducted in britain by the bbc , " the lord of the rings " was found to be the " nation 's best-loved book " .
in 2004 , both germany and australia found " the lord of the rings " to be their favourite book .
in 1999 , poll of amazon . com customers , " the lord of the rings " was judged to be their favourite " book of the millennium " .
tolkien said that the one ring was not an allegory for the atomic bomb , nor were his works a strict allegory of any kind , but were open to interpretation as the reader saw fit .
a few critics have found what they consider racial elements in the story .
counter-arguments note that race-focused critiques often omit relevant textual evidence , cite imagery from adaptations rather than the work itself , ignore the absence of evidence of racist attitudes or events in the author 's personal life , and claim that the perception of racism is itself a marginal view .
the opinions that pit races against each other are likely to reflect tolkien 's criticism of war rather than racist views .
in " the two towers " , the character samwise sees a fallen foe .
director peter jackson considers sam in the director 's commentary of the scene .
these sentiments , jackson argues , were derived from tolkien 's experience in the great war and found their way into his writings to show the evils of war itself , not of other races .
critics have also seen social class rather than race as being the determining factor in the portrayal of good and evil .
commentators such as science fiction author david brin have interpreted the work to hold devotion to a traditional elitist social structure .
in his essay " epic pooh " , science fiction and fantasy author michael moorcock critiques the world-view displayed by the book as deeply conservative , in both the " paternalism " of the narrative voice and the power-structures in the narrative .
tom shippey cites the origin of this portrayal of evil as a reflection of the prejudices of european middle-classes during the inter-war years towards the industrial working class .
other observers have cited christian , specifically catholic , themes in " the lord of the rings " .
the book has been read as the model of joseph campbell 's " monomyth " .
" the lord of the rings " has been made into movies , radio and stage .
the book has been adapted for radio four times .
in 1955 and 1956 , the bbc broadcast " the lord of the rings " , a 13-part radio adaptation of the story .
in the 1960s radio station wbai produced a short radio adaptation .
a 1979 dramatization of " the lord of the rings " was shown in the united states and subsequently issued on tape and cd .
in 1981 , the bbc broadcast " the lord of the rings " , a new dramatization in 26 half-hour instalments .
it was later made available on both tape and cd .
for this purpose it is generally edited into 13 one-hour episodes .
following j . r . tolkien 's sale of the movie rights for " the lord of the rings " to united artists in 1969 , rock band the beatles considered a corresponding movie project and approached stanley kubrick as a potential director .
the eventual director of the movie adaptation peter jackson further explained that a major hindrance to the project 's progression was tolkien 's opposition to the beatles .
british director john boorman also tried to make an adaptation of " the lord of the rings " for united artists in 1970 .
after the script was written , the production company scrapped the project .
two movie adaptations of the book have been made .
the first was j . r . r . tolkien 's the lord of the rings , released in 1978 .
a three-issue comic book version of the movie was also published in europe but not printed in english illustrations .
when bakshi 's investors got away of financing the second movie that would complete the story , the rest of the story was covered in an animated television special by rankin-bass .
stylistically , the two segments are very different .
the second and more commercially successful adaptation was peter jackson 's live action " the lord of the rings " movie trilogy .
all three parts won multiple academy awards , including best picture nominations .
the final instalment of this trilogy was the second movie to break the one-billion dollar barrier .
" the hunt for gollum " was released on the internet in may 2009 .
" born of hope " is a fan movie .
amazon acquired the global television rights to " the lord of the rings " in november 2017 .
the series will not be a direct adaptation of the books , but will instead introduce new stories that are set before " the fellowship of the ring " .
amazon said the deal had a lot of spin-off series as well .
the press release referred to " previously unexplored stories based on j . r . tolkien 's original writings " .
amazon will be the producer in conjunction with the tolkien estate and the tolkien trust , harpercollins , and new line television .
it is the most expensive television show ever produced .
in early july 2019 , the new zealand economic development minister david parker said that a large part of the series would be produced in new zealand following negotiations between amazon and the new zealand government .
in 1990 , recorded books published an audio version of " the lord of the rings " , with british actor rob inglis .
it was first staged in toronto , canada in 2006 .
tolkien 's work made more people interested in fantasy fiction .
the genre flowered throughout the 1960s .
lin carter called the single most cold-blooded , complete rip-off of another book that i have ever read .
dungeons & dragons , which popularized the role-playing gamemlearearearearearearearear genre in the 1970s , features many races found in " the lord of the rings " .
gary gygax , the lead designer of the game , said that he was influenced by " the lord of the rings " , stating that he included these elements as a marketing move to draw on the popularity the work enjoyed at the time he was developing the game .
the " lord of the rings " is very similar to many of the games .
research also suggests that some people who use fantasy games have tried to create an epic fantasy story .
swann is best known for his collaboration with michael flanders as flanders & swann , set six poems from " the lord of the rings " and one from " the adventures of tom bombadil "arth to music .
swann met with tolkien to play the songs for his approval .
the songs were published in 1967 as " the road goes ever on : a song cycle " .
rock bands of the 1970s were musically and lyrically inspired by the fantasy embracing counter-culture of the time ; british 70s rock band led zeppelin recorded several songs that contain references to " the lord of the rings " , such as gollum in " ramble on " , the misty mountains in " misty mountain hop " , and ringwraiths in the battle of evermore .
in 1970 , the swedish musician bo hansson released an instrumental concept album based on the book titled " sagan om ringen " .
the album was released internationally as " music inspired by lord of the rings " in 1972 .
the songs " rivendell " and " the necromancer " by rush were inspired by tolkien .
styx also made homage to tolkien on their album " pieces of eight " with the song " lords of the ring " .
progressive rock group camel paid homage to the text in their lengthy composition " nimrodel / the procession / the white rider " , and progressive rock band barclay harvest was inspired by the character galadriel to write a song by that name .
later , from the 1980s to the present day , many heavy metal acts have been influenced by tolkien .
blind guardian has written many songs relating to middle-earth .
most of battlelore is tolkien ' s-themed song .
summoning 's music is based upon tolkien .
gorgoroth , amon amarth , and amon amarth take their names from an area of mordor .
the finnish metal band nightwish also uses tolkien 's lyrics to describe them .
megadeth has released two songs , " this day we fight ! "
and " how the story ends " .
eichenschild is named for thorin oakenshield , a character in " the hobbit " , and naturally has a number of tolkien themed songs .
they are not to be confused with thorin eichenschild .
in 1988 , dutch composer and trombonist johan de meij completed his " symphony no . 1 " the lord of the rings " , which included 5 movements , titled " gandalf " , " lothlorien " , " gollum " , " journey in the dark " , and " hobbits " .
in 1989 the symphony was awarded the sudler composition award .
the danish ensemble have released a number of albums that feature the complete poems and songs of " the lord of the rings " set to music , with some featuring recitation by christopher lee .
she wrote an instrumental piece called " lothlorien " in 1991 .
" the lord of the rings " was a great and wide-ranging impact on popular culture , beginning with its publication in the 1950s , but especially throughout the 1960s and 1970s , during which time young people embraced it as a countercultural saga .
and " gandalf for president " were two phrases popular amongst united states tolkien fans during this time .
parodies like the " harvard lampoon " 's " bored of the rings " , the " veggietales " episode " lord of the beans " , the " south park " episode " the return of the fellowship of the ring to the two towers " , the " futurama " movie " , " " episode " lights ! "
, " the big bang theory " episode " the precious fragmentation " , and the " american dad ! "
episode " the return of the bling " shows the work 's continual presence in popular culture .
tolkien sold the merchandising rights to " the lord of the rings "arth and " the hobbit " according to the agreement .
after three years after the author 's death , united artists sold the rights to saul zaentz company , who now trade as tolkien enterprises .
since then all " authorized " merchandise has been signed-off by tolkien enterprises .
outside any commercial use from adaptations , from the late 1960s onwards there has been a lot of original licensed merchandise .
recent examples include the spiel des jahres award-winning snort for " best use of literature in a game " .
the song " the lord of the rings " has been mentioned in numerous songs including " the ballad of bilbo baggins " by leonard nimoy , led zeppelin 's " misty mountain hop " , " over the hills and far away " , " ramble on " , and " the battle of evermore " .
steve peregrin took custody of the band 's name was stephen ross porter whose name was taken from the hobbit peregrin took nedra better known as pippintify .
in 1970 , he formed a band called shagrat .
