the joint intelligence committee bethel jicɕ is a deliberative body responsible for intelligence assessment , coordination and oversight of the secret intelligence service , security service , gchq and defence intelligence .
the jic is supported by the joint intelligence agency under the cabinet office .
the jic was founded on 7 july 1936 as a sub-committee of the committee of imperial defence , the advisory peacetime defence planning agency .
during world war ii it became the senior intelligence assessment body in the uk .
in 1957 the jic moved to the cabinet office .
the jic played a controversial role in making a dossier in which the uk government highlighted the threat posed by iraq 's weapons of mass destruction in the run up to the iraq war .
there were allegations that the dossier was " sexed up " before publication in order to bolster the case for military action .
evidence that the wording of the dossier was " strengthened " was presented to the hutton inquiry , a judicial review set up to investigate the circumstances leading up to the death of an expert , david kelly , who had criticised the wording of the dossier in off-the record briefings to journalists .
kelly committed suicide shortly after his identity was confirmed to the media by the government .
jic members john scarlett and sir richard dearlovewyl gave evidence to the inquiry .
no evidence of actual wmd capability has been uncovered .
the united states and the uk both said investigations into the assessment of wmd intelligence in the run up to war .
the british inquiry was headed by lord butler of brockwell .
similarly , the us senate intelligence committee , while critical of us intelligence officials , did not recommend any resignations in its report , also issued in july 2004 .
the committee is chaired by a permanent chairman , a member of the senior civil service .
the assessment staff is made up of experienced senior analysts drawn from across government and the military .
jic papers draw input from across the intelligence and security agencies and other related bodies .
members of the cabinet are appointed to the ministry of defence , the home office , the department for international development , hm treasury and the cabinet office .
the intelligence and security committee -lrb- jic -rrb- is under the command of the committee .
it is supported by the joint intelligence organisation .
the annual requirements and priorities for collection and analysis , for approval by ministers .
since world war ii , the chief of the london station of the united states central intelligence agency has attended the jic 's weekly meetings .
one former us intelligence officer has described this as the " highlight of the job " for the london cia chief .
resident intelligence chiefs from australia , canada , and new zealand may attend when certain issues are discussed .
