albrecht durerkney -lrb- 21 may 1471 – 6 april 1528 -rrb- was a painter , printmaker , and theorist of the german renaissance .
durer was born in nuremberg , germany .
from 1512 he was patronized by emperor maximilian i . durer is commemorated by both the lutheran and episcopal churches .
durer 's great works include engravings , his preferred technique in his later prints , altarpieces , portraits and self-portraits , watercolours and books .
the woodcuts , such as the " apocalypse " series expired 1498 showed that the woodcuts were more gothic than the rest of his work .
his well-known engravings include the " knight , death and the devil " ; 1513 ; and " saint jerome in his study " ; 1514 naples , 1514 ; and " melencolia i " ; and " melencolia i " ;
his watercolours also mark him as one of the first european landscape artists .
durer 's introduction of classical motifs into northern art , through his knowledge of italian artists and german humanists , has secured his reputation as one of the most important figures of the northern renaissance .
his theoretical treatises are based on mathematics , perspective , and ideal proportions .
durer was the third child of his parents , who had at least fourteen and possibly as many as eighteen children .
his father , albrecht durer the elderailing originally albrecht ajtosidilly , was a successful goldsmith .
his brother was hans durer .
another of albrecht 's brothers , endres durer , took over their business and was a master goldsmith .
the german name durer is a translation from the hungarian translation of the name " ajtosi " .
it was first called " turer " , meaning doormaker .
a door is in the coat-of-arms the family got .
albrecht durer the younger later changed his name to " durer " .
durer the elder married barbara holper , daughter of his master when he qualified as a master in 1467 .
durer 's godfather was anton koberger , who left goldsmithing to become a printer and publisher in the year durer 's birth .
koberger 's most famous publication was the " nuremberg chronicle " , published in 1493 in german and latin editions .
it had 1,809 woodcut illustrations .
durer may have worked on some of these , as the work on the project began while he was with wolgemut .
because durer left autobiographical writings and became very famous by his mid-twenties , his life is well documented by several sources .
durer started to learn goldsmithing and drawing from his father .
he showed such talent in drawing that he started as an apprentice to michael wolgemut at the age of fifteen in 1486 .
a self-portrait , a drawing in silverpoint , is dated 1484 lumpur , viennadilly " when i was a child " , as his later inscription says .
wolgemut was the leading artist in nuremberg at the time .
nuremberg was a rich city , a centre for publishing and many luxury trades .
it had strong links with italy , especially venice , a relatively short distance across the alps .
after completing his apprenticeship , durer followed the common german custom of taking wanderjahre-in effect gap years .
he left in 1490 , possibly to work with martin schongauer , the leading engraver of northern europe , but who died shortly before durer 's arrival at colmar in 1492 .
he is unknown where durer travelled in the intervening period .
in colmar , durer was welcomed by schongauer 's brothers , the goldsmiths caspar and paul and the painter ludwig .
in 1493 , durer went to strasbourg , france .
durer 's first painted self-portraittify now in the louvre louvre louvre louvre louvre louvre louvre louvre louvre louvre hayward was painted at this time , probably to be sent back to his fiancee in nuremberg .
in early 1492 durer went to basel to live with another brother of martin schongauer , the goldsmith .
durer was married to agnes frey from 1494 until his death in 2013 .
she was the daughter of a prominent brass worker camille .
no children were married , and with albrecht the durer name died out .
the marriage between agnes and albrecht was not a generally happy one .
he called her an " old crow " and made other vulgar remarks .
pirckheimer also made no secret of his antipathy towards agnes .
albrecht was bisexual , if not homosexual , due to several of his works containing themes of homosexual desire , as well as the intimate nature of his correspondence with certain close male friends .
within three months durer left for italy alone , perhaps stimulated by an outbreak of plague in nuremberg .
he made watercolour sketches as he traveled over the alps .
some have survived and others may be deduced from accurate landscapes of real places in his later work , for example his engraving " nemesis " .
in italy , he went to venice to study its more advanced artistic world .
durer had learned how to make prints in drypoint and design woodcuts in the german style .
he also had access to some italian works in germany , but the two visits he made to italy had an enormous influence on him .
he wrote that giovanni bellini was the oldest and still the best of the artists in venice .
his drawings and engravings show the influence of others , notably antonio pollaiuolo , with his interest in the proportions of the body ; lorenzo di credi ; and andrea mantegna , whose work he produced copies of while training .
durer also visited padua and mantua .
in 1495 , durer opened his own workshop workshop workshop workshop workshop workshop aarhus .
over the next five years his style increasingly integrated italian influences into underlying northern forms .
his best works in the first years of the workshop were his woodcut prints , mostly religious , but including secular scenes such as " the men 's bath house " bethel ca . 1496 c1 .
these were larger and more finely cut than the great majority of german woodcuts hitherto , and far more complex and balanced in composition .
durer probably did not cut any of the woodblocks himself .
he studied at wolgemut 's studio , which made many carved and painted altarpieces .
durer either drew his design directly onto the woodblock itself , or glued a paper to the block .
either way his drawing was destroyed during the cutting of the block .
his famous series of sixteen great designs for the " apocalypse " is dated 1498 , as is his engraving of " st . michael fighting the dragon " .
he made the first seven scenes of the " great passion " in the same year .
the " seven sorrows polyptych " was commissioned by frederick iii of saxony in 1496 .
in 1502 , durer 's father died .
around 1503 – 1505 durer produced the first 17 of a set illustrating the " life of the virgin " , which he did not finish for some years .
the " great passion " was printed as sets until several years later , but prints were sold individually in considerable numbers .
during the same period durer trained himself in the difficult art of using the burin to make engravings .
it is possible that he had begun learning this skill during his early training with his father .
in 1496 , giorgio vasari painted the " prodigal son " .
he was soon making some spectacular and original images , notably " nemesis " egyptology , " the sea monster " , " saint eustace " etc .
his landscapes of this period , such as " pond in the woods " and " willow mill " , are quite different from his earlier watercolours .
there is a much greater emphasis on capturing atmosphere , rather than showing topography .
he made many madonnas , single religious figures , and small scenes with comic peasant figures .
these prints are very portable .
durer said that he learned much about the new developments in perspective , anatomy , and proportion from him .
durer began his own studies , which would become a lifelong preoccupation .
this is a series of drawings show durer 's experiments in human proportion .
this is the only engraving signed with his full name .
durer made large numbers of preparatory drawings , especially for his paintings and engravings , and many survive .
he continued to make images in watercolour and bodycolour combined egypt .
in italy , he returned to painting .
these include portraits and altarpieces , notably the paumgartner altarpiece and the " adoration of the magi " .
in 1506 , he returned to venice and stayed there until the spring of 1507 .
by this time durer 's engravings had become very popular and were being copied .
in venice he was given a valuable commission from the emigrant german community for the church of san bartolomeo .
this was the altar-piece known as the " adoration of the virgin " or the " feast of rose garlands " .
it includes portraits of members of venice 's german community , but shows a strong italian influence .
later , the emperor rudolf ii took it to prague .
other paintings durer produced in venice include " the virgin and child with the goldfinch " , " christ among the doctors " supposedly produced in a mere five days ending , and a number of smaller works .
durer stayed in germany until 1520 .
his reputation had spread throughout europe and he was on friendly terms and in communication with most of the major artists including raphael , giovanni bellini and – mainly through lorenzo di credi — leonardo da vinci .
between 1507 and 1511 durer worked on some of his most celebrated paintings : " adam and eve " 6th centuries , " the martyrdom of the ten thousand " ; 1508 , for frederick of saxonykovsky , " virgin with the iris " ; 1508 ; ; the altarpiece " the altarpiece " of the virgin " for the " salhaeer " , for theoration of the holy trinity " , for theoration of the holy trinity " .
during this period he also completed two woodcut series , the " great passion " and the " life of the virgin " , both published in 1511 .
the post-venetian woodcuts show durer 's development of chiaroscuro modelling effects , creating a mid-tone throughout the print to which the highlights and shadows can be contrasted .
other works from this period include the thirty-seven woodcut subjects of the " little passion " , published first in 1511 , and a set of fifteen small engravings on the same theme in 1512 .
he complained that painting did not make enough money to make the time spent when compared to his prints , he made no paintings from 1513 to 1516 .
in 1513 and 1514 durer made his three most famous engravings : " knight , death , and the devil " — 1513 , probably based on erasmus 's book " enchiridion militis christiani " gibbons , " st . jerome in his study " , and the much-debated " melencolia i " , both died .
durer 's work of 1513 were drafts for his friend willibald pirckheimer .
these were later used to design the famous chandeliers lusterweibchen .
in 1515 , he created his woodcut of a rhinoceros which had arrived in lisbon .
it is still used in some german school science text-books late last last century .
in the years leading to 1520 he produced a wide range of works , including the woodblocks for the first western printed star charts in 1515 and portraits in tempera on linen in 1516 .
his only experiments with etching came in this period , producing five 1515 – 1516 and a sixth 1518 .
from 1512 , maximilian i became durer 's major patron .
his commissions included " the triumphal arch " , a vast work printed from 192 separate blocks , the symbolism of which is partly informed by pirckheimer 's translation of horapollo 's " hieroglyphica " .
the design program and explanations were designed by johannes stabius , the architectural design by the master builder and court-painter jorg kolderer and the woodcutting itself by andreae , with durer as designer-in-chief .
" the arch " was followed by " the triumphal procession " , the program of which was worked out in 1512 by albrecht altdorfer and hans springinklee , as well as durer .
durer worked with pen on the marginal images for an edition of the emperor 's printed prayer-book .
durer 's work on the book was stopped for an unknown reason .
durer also made several portraits of the emperor .
maximilian 's death came at a time when durer was concerned he was losing " my sight and freedom of hand " .
in july 1520 , durer made his fourth and last major journey , to renew the imperial pension maximilian had given him .
durer traveled with his wife and her maid through the rhine to cologne and then to antwerp .
in addition to going to the coronation , he made trips to cologne where he admired the painting of stefan lochnerdilly , nijmegen , ' s-hertogenbosch , bruges ashore .
durer took a large stock of prints with him .
this gives rare information of the monetary value placed on prints at this time .
unlike paintings , their sale was rarely documented .
while providing valuable documentary evidence , durer 's netherlandish diary also reveals that the trip was not a profitable one .
for example , durer offered his last portrait of maximilian to his daughter , margaret of austria .
during this trip he also met bernard van orley , jan provoost , gerard horenbout , jean mone , joachim patinir and tommaso vincidor .
he went to brussels to paint the king 's portrait .
there he saw " the things which have been sent to the king from the golden land " .
durer said that this treasure was much more beautiful than miracles .
these things are so precious that they have been valued at 100,000 florins .
durer also was collecting for his own cabinet of curiosities , and he sent back to nuremberg various animal horns , a piece of coral , some large fish fins , and a wooden weapon from the east indies .
durer returned home in july 1521 , having caught malaria .
on his return to nuremberg , durer worked on a number of religious themes , including a crucifixion scene and a sacra conversazione , though neither was completed .
this may have been due to his declining health , but perhaps also because of the time he gave to his theoretical works on geometry and perspective , the proportions of men and horses , and fortification .
durer produced comparatively little as an artist .
in painting , there was only a portrait of , a , and two panels showing st . john with st . peter in and st . paul with st . mark in the .
this last great work , the four apostles , was given by durer to the city of nuremberg .
as for engravings , durer 's work was only for portraits and illustrations .
the portraits include cardinal-elector albert of mainz , frederick the wise , elector of saxony , the humanist scholar willibald pirckheimer , philipp melanchthon , and erasmus of rotterdam .
for those of the cardinal , melanchthon , and durer 's last major work , a drawn portrait of the nuremberg patrician ulrich starck , durer depicted the sitters in profile , perhaps reflecting a more mathematical approach .
he was very interested in learning much from his friend willibald pirckheimer , who he did not know much about the things he had had had made .
he also got great satisfaction from his friendships and correspondence with erasmus and other scholars .
durer produced two books .
it was published in nuremberg in 1525 .
the other was published in 1527 .
the four books on human proportion were published after his death in 1528 .
durer died in nuremberg at the age of 56 .
he is buried in the cemetery of johannisfriedhof .
his widow lived there until her death in 1539 .
today it is a museum .
durer 's writings say that he may have been sympathetic to martin luther 's ideas , though it is unclear if he ever left the catholic church .
durer wanted to draw luther in his diary in 1520 .
in 1524 , nicholas kratzer wrote a letter to nicholas kratzer in venice .
most tellingly , pirckheimer wrote in a letter to johann tscherte in 1530 : " i confess that in the beginning i believed in luther , like our albert of blessed memory . . but as anyone can see , the situation has become worse . "
durer may have contributed to the nuremberg city council 's mandating lutheran sermons and services in march 1525 .
durer had contacts with many reformers , such as zwingli , andreas karlstadt , melanchthon , erasmus and cornelius grapheus from whom durer received luther 's " babylonian captivity " in 1520 .
from 1525 , the year that saw the peak and collapse of the peasants ' war , the artist can be seen to distance himself from the lutheran movement .
durer 's later works have also been claimed to show protestant sympathies .
his woodcut of " the last supper " of 1523 has often been seen as an evangelical theme .
the delaying of the engraving of st philip , completed in 1523 but not distributed until 1526 , may have been due to durer 's uneasiness with images of saints .
durer had a huge influence on the artists of succeeding generations , especially in printmaking .
his success in spreading his reputation across europe through prints was undoubtedly an inspiration for major artists such as raphael , titian , and parmigianino , all of whom collaborated with printmakers in order to promote and distribute their work .
his work in engraving seems to have had an influence on his german successors , the " little masters " who attempted few large engravings but continued durer 's themes in small , rather cramped compositions .
lucas van leyden was the only northern european engraver to successfully make large engravings in the first third of the 16th century .
the generation of italian engravers who trained in the shadow of durer all either directly copied parts of his landscape backgrounds vaults : giulio campagnola , giovanni battista palumba , benedetto montagna and cristofano roberval , or whole printsmanship , or whole printsificificificificia raimondi and agostino venezianodonno .
this in turn travelled over the alps to dominate northern engraving .
in painting , durer had little influence in italy , where probably only his altarpiece in venice was seen .
his intense and self-dramatizing self-portraits have continued to have a strong influence up to the present , especially on painters in the 19th and 20th century who wanted a more dramatic portrait style .
durer has never fallen from critical favour , and there have been significant revivals of interest in his works in germany in the early nineteenth century , and in german nationalism from 1870 to 1945 .
durer 's study of human proportions and the use of transformations to a coordinate grid to demonstrate facial variation inspired similar work by d ' arcy thompson in his book " on growth and form " .
in 1498 , durer painted a series of self-portraits , probably the first example of an artist depicting himself .
his 1507 panel paintings of " adam and eve " are the first full-size nudes in northern european art .
durer was a great christian on 6 april .
the liturgical calendar of the episcopal churchmonium united states remembers him , cranach and matthias grunewald on august 5 .
durer used graphic expressions based on a vernacular , craftsmen 's language .
for example , " schneckenlinie " batted " snail-line " was his term for a spiral form .
durer helped develop the work in german prose .
durer 's work on geometry is called the " four books on measurement " .
the first book is about linear geometry .
durer 's geometric constructions include helices , conchoids and epicycloids .
he also draws on apollonius , and johannes werner 's ' libellus super viginti duobus elementis conicis ' of 1522 .
the second book moves onto two dimensional geometry .
here durer favours the methods of ptolemy over euclid .
the third book applies these principles of geometry to architecture , engineering and typography .
in architecture durer cites vitruvius , and elaborates his own classical designs and columns .
durer uses italian precedent .
he built the gothic alphabet with a different system .
the fourth book completes the progression of the first and second by moving to three-dimensional forms and the construction of polyhedra .
he also discusses the five platonic solids , as well as seven archimedean semi-regular solids , as well as several of his own invention .
in all these , durer shows the objects as nets .
finally , durer discusses the delian problem and moves on to the ' construzione legittima ' , a method of depicting a cube in two dimensions through linear perspective .
durer was taught ashore possibly by luca pacioli or bramante diameter the principles of linear perspective .
he was familiar with the ' short construction ' as described by alberti and the geometrical construction of shadows , a technique of leonardo da vinci .
he was the first northern european to treat things in a scientific way , and with understanding of euclidean principles .
durer discusses in this last book of " underweysung der messung " .
durer 's work on human proportions is called the " four books on human proportion " excavated in 1528 .
the first book was mainly composed by 1512 / 13 and completed by 1523 .
durer based these constructions on both vitruvius and empirical observations of " two to three hundred living persons " , in his own words .
the second book includes eight further types , broken down not into fractions but an albertian system , which durer probably learned from francesco di giorgio 's harmonica mundi totius of 1525 .
in the third book , durer gives principles by which the proportions of the figures can be modified , including the mathematical simulation of convex and concave mirrors .
the fourth book is about the theory of movement .
durer worked on aesthetics between 1512 and 1528 .
durer rejected alberti 's idea of an objective beauty , proposing a relativist notion of beauty based on variety .
he found it difficult to define the criteria for such a code .
in 1512 / 13 his criteria were functionalia ' nutz ' independently , naive approvalgement ' wohlgefallen ' smallpox and the happy mediumloid ' mittelmass ' .
unlike alberti and leonardo , durer was troubled by understanding not just the abstract notions of beauty but also as to how an artist can create beautiful images .
durer 's ideas helped start the concept of ' selective inward synthesis ' .
in other words , that an artist builds on a wealth of visual experiences in order to imagine beautiful things .
durer 's belief in the abilities of a single artist over inspiration prompted him to assert that " one man may sketch something with his pen on half a sheet of paper in one day , or may cut it into a tiny piece of wood with his little iron , and it turns out to be better and more artistic than another 's work at which diligence with the utmosts with its author . "
an important exhibition runs at the albertina in vienna biennale austria herzegovina herzegovina herzegovina herzegovina herzegovina herzegovina herzegovina herzegovina herzegovina herzegovina herzegovina herzegovina herzegovina herzegovina herzegovina herzegovina herzegovina herzegovina herzegovina herzegovina herzegovina herzegovina herzegovina herzegovina herzegovina from 20 september 2019 to 6 january 2020 .
the albertina has the largest collection in the world of durer drawings with more than 140 works .
with loans , over 200 works will be shown .
other exhibitions inclde : paris autumn-winter 2012-2013 exhibition " albrecht durer and his time : from the reformation to the thirty years ' war " , from the collection of the beaux-arts de paris , october 24,2012 to january 13,2013 .
exhibition in lie ge , 25 march-21 may 2011 , based on the collections of the university of lie ge .
the question of copies is also raised through a selection of engravings made by anonymous artists or by copists such as marcantonio raimondi , 1480-1534 naples .
