from 1512 he was patronized by emperor maximilian i . durer is commemorated by both the lutheran and episcopal churches .
durer 's introduction of classical motifs into northern art , through his knowledge of italian artists and german humanists , has secured his reputation as one of the most important figures of the northern renaissance .
durer was the third child of his parents , who had at least fourteen and possibly as many as eighteen children .
another of albrecht 's brothers , endres durer , took over their business and was a master goldsmith .
albrecht durer the younger later changed his name to " durer " .
durer the elder married barbara holper , daughter of his master when he qualified as a master in 1467 .
durer 's godfather was anton koberger , who left goldsmithing to become a printer and publisher in the year durer 's birth .
koberger 's most famous publication was the " nuremberg chronicle " , published in 1493 in german and latin editions .
he showed such talent in drawing that he started as an apprentice to michael wolgemut at the age of fifteen in 1486 .
a self-portrait , a drawing in silverpoint , is dated 1484 lumpur , viennadilly " when i was a child " , as his later inscription says .
nuremberg was a rich city , a centre for publishing and many luxury trades .
he left in 1490 , possibly to work with martin schongauer , the leading engraver of northern europe , but who died shortly before durer 's arrival at colmar in 1492 .
he is unknown where durer travelled in the intervening period .
in colmar , durer was welcomed by schongauer 's brothers , the goldsmiths caspar and paul and the painter ludwig .
in early 1492 durer went to basel to live with another brother of martin schongauer , the goldsmith .
durer was married to agnes frey from 1494 until his death in 2013 .
she was the daughter of a prominent brass worker camille .
no children were married , and with albrecht the durer name died out .
he called her an " old crow " and made other vulgar remarks .
pirckheimer also made no secret of his antipathy towards agnes .
albrecht was bisexual , if not homosexual , due to several of his works containing themes of homosexual desire , as well as the intimate nature of his correspondence with certain close male friends .
within three months durer left for italy alone , perhaps stimulated by an outbreak of plague in nuremberg .
some have survived and others may be deduced from accurate landscapes of real places in his later work , for example his engraving " nemesis " .
durer had learned how to make prints in drypoint and design woodcuts in the german style .
he also had access to some italian works in germany , but the two visits he made to italy had an enormous influence on him .
his drawings and engravings show the influence of others , notably antonio pollaiuolo , with his interest in the proportions of the body ; lorenzo di credi ; and andrea mantegna , whose work he produced copies of while training .
his best works in the first years of the workshop were his woodcut prints , mostly religious , but including secular scenes such as " the men 's bath house " bethel ca .
these were larger and more finely cut than the great majority of german woodcuts hitherto , and far more complex and balanced in composition .
he studied at wolgemut 's studio , which made many carved and painted altarpieces .
durer either drew his design directly onto the woodblock itself , or glued a paper to the block .
either way his drawing was destroyed during the cutting of the block .
the " seven sorrows polyptych " was commissioned by frederick iii of saxony in 1496 .
in 1502 , durer 's father died .
around 1503 – 1505 durer produced the first 17 of a set illustrating the " life of the virgin " , which he did not finish for some years .
the " great passion " was printed as sets until several years later , but prints were sold individually in considerable numbers .
during the same period durer trained himself in the difficult art of using the burin to make engravings .
his landscapes of this period , such as " pond in the woods " and " willow mill " , are quite different from his earlier watercolours .
he made many madonnas , single religious figures , and small scenes with comic peasant figures .
durer said that he learned much about the new developments in perspective , anatomy , and proportion from him .
these include portraits and altarpieces , notably the paumgartner altarpiece and the " adoration of the magi " .
in 1506 , he returned to venice and stayed there until the spring of 1507 .
by this time durer 's engravings had become very popular and were being copied .
in venice he was given a valuable commission from the emigrant german community for the church of san bartolomeo .
this was the altar-piece known as the " adoration of the virgin " or the " feast of rose garlands " .
it includes portraits of members of venice 's german community , but shows a strong italian influence .
other paintings durer produced in venice include " the virgin and child with the goldfinch " , " christ among the doctors " supposedly produced in a mere five days ending , and a number of smaller works .
durer stayed in germany until 1520 .
his reputation had spread throughout europe and he was on friendly terms and in communication with most of the major artists including raphael , giovanni bellini and – mainly through lorenzo di credi — leonardo da vinci .
between 1507 and 1511 durer worked on some of his most celebrated paintings : " adam and eve " 6th centuries , " the martyrdom of the ten thousand " ; 1508 , for frederick of saxonykovsky , " virgin with the iris " ; 1508 ; ; the altarpiece " the altarpiece " of the virgin " for the " salhaeer " , for theoration of the holy trinity " , for theoration of the holy trinity " .
during this period he also completed two woodcut series , the " great passion " and the " life of the virgin " , both published in 1511 .
the post-venetian woodcuts show durer 's development of chiaroscuro modelling effects , creating a mid-tone throughout the print to which the highlights and shadows can be contrasted .
other works from this period include the thirty-seven woodcut subjects of the " little passion " , published first in 1511 , and a set of fifteen small engravings on the same theme in 1512 .
he complained that painting did not make enough money to make the time spent when compared to his prints , he made no paintings from 1513 to 1516 .
in 1513 and 1514 durer made his three most famous engravings : " knight , death , and the devil " — 1513 , probably based on erasmus 's book " enchiridion militis christiani " gibbons , " st . jerome in his study " , and the much-debated " melencolia i " , both died .
in the years leading to 1520 he produced a wide range of works , including the woodblocks for the first western printed star charts in 1515 and portraits in tempera on linen in 1516 .
his only experiments with etching came in this period , producing five 1515 – 1516 and a sixth 1518 .
from 1512 , maximilian i became durer 's major patron .
the design program and explanations were designed by johannes stabius , the architectural design by the master builder and court-painter jorg kolderer and the woodcutting itself by andreae , with durer as designer-in-chief .
"
the arch " was followed by " the triumphal procession " , the program of which was worked out in 1512 by albrecht altdorfer and hans springinklee , as well as durer .
maximilian 's death came at a time when durer was concerned he was losing " my sight and freedom of hand " .
in july 1520 , durer made his fourth and last major journey , to renew the imperial pension maximilian had given him .
durer traveled with his wife and her maid through the rhine to cologne and then to antwerp .
in addition to going to the coronation , he made trips to cologne where he admired the painting of stefan lochnerdilly , nijmegen , ' s-hertogenbosch , bruges ashore .
this gives rare information of the monetary value placed on prints at this time .
while providing valuable documentary evidence , durer 's netherlandish diary also reveals that the trip was not a profitable one .
he went to brussels to paint the king 's portrait .
durer also was collecting for his own cabinet of curiosities , and he sent back to nuremberg various animal horns , a piece of coral , some large fish fins , and a wooden weapon from the east indies .
on his return to nuremberg , durer worked on a number of religious themes , including a crucifixion scene and a sacra conversazione , though neither was completed .
this may have been due to his declining health , but perhaps also because of the time he gave to his theoretical works on geometry and perspective , the proportions of men and horses , and fortification .
this last great work , the four apostles , was given by durer to the city of nuremberg .
the portraits include cardinal-elector albert of mainz , frederick the wise , elector of saxony , the humanist scholar willibald pirckheimer , philipp melanchthon , and erasmus of rotterdam .
for those of the cardinal , melanchthon , and durer 's last major work , a drawn portrait of the nuremberg patrician ulrich starck , durer depicted the sitters in profile , perhaps reflecting a more mathematical approach .
he was very interested in learning much from his friend willibald pirckheimer , who he did not know much about the things he had had had made .
he also got great satisfaction from his friendships and correspondence with erasmus and other scholars .
it was published in nuremberg in 1525 .
the other was published in 1527 .
the four books on human proportion were published after his death in 1528 .
durer died in nuremberg at the age of 56 .
he is buried in the cemetery of johannisfriedhof .
durer 's writings say that he may have been sympathetic to martin luther 's ideas , though it is unclear if he ever left the catholic church .
durer wanted to draw luther in his diary in 1520 .
in 1524 , nicholas kratzer wrote a letter to nicholas kratzer in venice .
most tellingly , pirckheimer wrote in a letter to johann tscherte in 1530 : " i confess that in the beginning i believed in luther , like our albert of blessed memory . . but as anyone can see , the situation has become worse . "
durer may have contributed to the nuremberg city council 's mandating lutheran sermons and services in march 1525 .
durer had contacts with many reformers , such as zwingli , andreas karlstadt , melanchthon , erasmus and cornelius grapheus from whom durer received luther 's " babylonian captivity " in 1520 .
from 1525 , the year that saw the peak and collapse of the peasants ' war , the artist can be seen to distance himself from the lutheran movement .
durer 's later works have also been claimed to show protestant sympathies .
the delaying of the engraving of st philip , completed in 1523 but not distributed until 1526 , may have been due to durer 's uneasiness with images of saints .
his success in spreading his reputation across europe through prints was undoubtedly an inspiration for major artists such as raphael , titian , and parmigianino , all of whom collaborated with printmakers in order to promote and distribute their work .
his work in engraving seems to have had an influence on his german successors , the " little masters " who attempted few large engravings but continued durer 's themes in small , rather cramped compositions .
lucas van leyden was the only northern european engraver to successfully make large engravings in the first third of the 16th century .
the generation of italian engravers who trained in the shadow of durer all either directly copied parts of his landscape backgrounds vaults : giulio campagnola , giovanni battista palumba , benedetto montagna and cristofano roberval , or whole printsmanship , or whole printsificificificificia raimondi and agostino venezianodonno .
in painting , durer had little influence in italy , where probably only his altarpiece in venice was seen .
his intense and self-dramatizing self-portraits have continued to have a strong influence up to the present , especially on painters in the 19th and 20th century who wanted a more dramatic portrait style .
durer has never fallen from critical favour , and there have been significant revivals of interest in his works in germany in the early nineteenth century , and in german nationalism from 1870 to 1945 .
durer 's study of human proportions and the use of transformations to a coordinate grid to demonstrate facial variation inspired similar work by d ' arcy thompson in his book " on growth and form " .
his 1507 panel paintings of " adam and eve " are the first full-size nudes in northern european art .
the liturgical calendar of the episcopal churchmonium united states remembers him , cranach and matthias grunewald on august 5 .
durer used graphic expressions based on a vernacular , craftsmen 's language .
durer 's work on geometry is called the " four books on measurement " .
he also draws on apollonius , and johannes werner 's ' libellus super viginti duobus elementis conicis ' of 1522 .
the second book moves onto two dimensional geometry .
the fourth book completes the progression of the first and second by moving to three-dimensional forms and the construction of polyhedra .
in all these , durer shows the objects as nets .
finally , durer discusses the delian problem and moves on to the ' construzione legittima ' , a method of depicting a cube in two dimensions through linear perspective .
he was familiar with the ' short construction ' as described by alberti and the geometrical construction of shadows , a technique of leonardo da vinci .
he was the first northern european to treat things in a scientific way , and with understanding of euclidean principles .
durer 's work on human proportions is called the " four books on human proportion " excavated in 1528 .
the first book was mainly composed by 1512 / 13 and completed by 1523 .
durer based these constructions on both vitruvius and empirical observations of " two to three hundred living persons " , in his own words .
the second book includes eight further types , broken down not into fractions but an albertian system , which durer probably learned from francesco di giorgio 's harmonica mundi totius of 1525 .
in the third book , durer gives principles by which the proportions of the figures can be modified , including the mathematical simulation of convex and concave mirrors .
in other words , that an artist builds on a wealth of visual experiences in order to imagine beautiful things .
durer 's belief in the abilities of a single artist over inspiration prompted him to assert that " one man may sketch something with his pen on half a sheet of paper in one day , or may cut it into a tiny piece of wood with his little iron , and it turns out to be better and more artistic than another 's work at which diligence with the utmosts with its author . "
other exhibitions inclde : paris autumn-winter 2012-2013 exhibition " albrecht durer and his time : from the reformation to the thirty years ' war " , from the collection of the beaux-arts de paris , october 24,2012 to january 13,2013 .
exhibition in lie ge , 25 march-21 may 2011 , based on the collections of the university of lie ge .
the question of copies is also raised through a selection of engravings made by anonymous artists or by copists such as marcantonio raimondi , 1480-1534 naples .