empress suiko ¥ 古 天 皇 , suiko-tenno prefecture , suiko-tenno foley foley , 554 – 628mute was the 33rd monarch of japan , according to the traditional order of succession .
suiko died in 628 .
in the history of japan , suiko was the first of eight women to be empress .
the seven women sovereigns reigning after suiko were kogyoku / saimei , jito , genmei , gensho , koken / shotoku , meisho and go-sakuramachi .
before her ascension to the chrysanthemum throne , her personal nameplate her " imina " was mikekashiya-hime-no-mikoto , also called toyomike kashikiya hime no mikoto .
empress suiko had several names including princess nukatabe andhendoku .
she was the third daughter of emperor kimmei .
her mother was soga no iname 's daughter soga no kitashihime .
suiko was the younger sister of emperor yomei .
they had one mother .
empress suiko was a consort to her half-brother emperor bidatsu .
she had seven children with her .
after bidatsu 's death , suiko 's brother , emperor yomei , came to power for about two years before dying of illness .
when yo mei 's death , another power struggle arose between the soga clan and the mononobe clan .
the sogas prevailed once again .
sushun began to resent the power of soga no umako , the head of the soga clan , and umako , perhaps out of fear that sushun might strike first , had him assassinated by yamatoaya no ataikomaikomaikoma prefecture in 592 .
when asked to become king , suiko became the first of the many examples in japanese history .
suiko 's contemporary title would not have been " tenno " .
rather , it was presumably " sumeramikoto " or " amenoshita shiroshimesu okimi " 治 天 下 大 王 ¥ , meaning " the great queen who rules all under heaven " .
suiko might have been referred to asibility [unk] 大 王 / 大 [unk] turnout or the " great queen of yamato " .
shotoku was made regent the next year .
although political power during suiko 's reign is widely viewed as having been wielded by prince shotoku and soga no umako , suiko was far from powerless .
the mere fact that she survived and her reign suggests she had significant political skills .
in 599 , an earthquake destroyed buildings in yamato province in what is now nara prefecture .
suiko 's refusal to grant soga no umako 's request that he be granted the imperial territory known as kazuraki no agata in 624 is said to be independent from his influence .
some of the achievements under empress suiko 's reign include the official recognition of buddhism by the issuance of the three treasures edict in 594 .
suiko was one of the first buddhist monarchs in japan .
the reign of this empress was marked by the opening of relations with the sui court in 600 .
the adoption of the sexagenary cycle calendar occurs in japan .
at a time when imperial succession was generally determined by clan leaders , rather than the emperor , suiko left only vague signs of succession to two candidates while on her deathbed .
tamura was a grandson of emperor bidatsu .
yamashiro was a son of prince shotoku .
after a brief struggle within the soga clan in which one of prince yamashiro 's main supporters was killed , prince tamura was chosen and he was succeeded as emperor jomei in 629 .
suiko ruled for 35 years .
although there were seven other reigning empresses , their successors were most often selected from amongst the males of the paternal imperial bloodline .
empress gensho , who was followed by her daughter , empress gensho , is the only one in this conventional argument .
the actual place of his grave is known .
this empress is traditionally venerated at a memorial shinto shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine osaka .
the imperial household agency designates this location as suiko 's mausoleum .
it is formally named " shinaga no yamada no misasagi " .
