empress suiko ¥ 古 天 皇 , suiko-tenno prefecture , suiko-tenno foley foley , 554 – 628mute was the 33rd monarch of japan , according to the traditional order of succession .
suiko died in 628 .
in the history of japan , suiko was the first of eight women to be empress .
before her ascension to the chrysanthemum throne , her personal nameplate her " imina " was mikekashiya-hime-no-mikoto , also called toyomike kashikiya hime no mikoto .
when yo mei 's death , another power struggle arose between the soga clan and the mononobe clan .
sushun began to resent the power of soga no umako , the head of the soga clan , and umako , perhaps out of fear that sushun might strike first , had him assassinated by yamatoaya no ataikomaikomaikoma prefecture in 592 .
when asked to become king , suiko became the first of the many examples in japanese history .
suiko 's contemporary title would not have been " tenno " .
rather , it was presumably " sumeramikoto " or " amenoshita shiroshimesu okimi " 治 天 下 大 王 ¥ , meaning " the great queen who rules all under heaven " .
suiko might have been referred to asibility [unk] 大 王 / 大 [unk] turnout or the " great queen of yamato " .
shotoku was made regent the next year .
although political power during suiko 's reign is widely viewed as having been wielded by prince shotoku and soga no umako , suiko was far from powerless .
the mere fact that she survived and her reign suggests she had significant political skills .
in 599 , an earthquake destroyed buildings in yamato province in what is now nara prefecture .
suiko 's refusal to grant soga no umako 's request that he be granted the imperial territory known as kazuraki no agata in 624 is said to be independent from his influence .
some of the achievements under empress suiko 's reign include the official recognition of buddhism by the issuance of the three treasures edict in 594 .
suiko was one of the first buddhist monarchs in japan .
the reign of this empress was marked by the opening of relations with the sui court in 600 .
the adoption of the sexagenary cycle calendar occurs in japan .
at a time when imperial succession was generally determined by clan leaders , rather than the emperor , suiko left only vague signs of succession to two candidates while on her deathbed .
after a brief struggle within the soga clan in which one of prince yamashiro 's main supporters was killed , prince tamura was chosen and he was succeeded as emperor jomei in 629 .
suiko ruled for 35 years .
empress gensho , who was followed by her daughter , empress gensho , is the only one in this conventional argument .