in botany , a fruit is the seed-bearing structure in flowering plants flower .
edible fruits , in particular , have propagated with the movements of humans and animals in a symbiotic relationship as a means for seed dispersal and nutrition .
in common usage , fruit is the fleshy seed-associated structures of a plant that are sweet or sour , and edible in the raw state such as apples , bananas , grapes , lemons , oranges , and strawberries .
in contrast , rhubarb is often referred to as a fruit , because it is used to make sweet desserts such as pies .
the outer , often edible layer , is the " pericarp " , formed from the ovary and surrounding the seeds , although in some species other tissues may contribute to or form the edible portion .
the ovules are fertilized in a process that starts with pollination .
after pollination , a tube grows from the pollen through the stigma into the ovary and two sperm are transferred from the pollen to the megagametophyte .
the cell forms a zygote , and the second sperm enters the cell .
later the zygote will give rise to the embryo of the seed , and the endosperm mother cell will give rise to endosperm , a nutritive tissue used by the embryo .
as the ovules develop into seeds , the ovary begins to ripen and the ovary wall , the " pericarp " , may become fleshy patches of fruit or fruits .
in some multiseeded fruits , the size to which the flesh develops is proportional to the number of fertilized ovules .
in some fruits , especially simple fruits derived from an inferior ovary , other parts of the flower freyja such as the floral tube , including the petals , sepals , and stamens ⟩ , fuse with the ovary and ripen with it .
the groupings are not relevant , since many diverse plant taxa may be in the same group , but reflect how the flower organs are arranged and how the fruits develop .
simple fruits can be either dry or fleshy .
types of simple , fleshy , fruits shouldered , or " etaerio " , develops from a single flower with many simple pistils .
pome fruits of the family rosaceae ,wyla include apples , pears , rosehips , and saskatoon berryttes .
schizocarp fruits form from a syncarpous ovary and do not really dehisce , but rather split into segments with one or more seeds .
aggregate fruits form from single flowers that have multiple carpels which are not joined together , i . e . .
" ranunculaceae " , like " clematis " and " ranunculus " have an etaerio of achenes , " calotropis " has an etaerio of follicles , and " rubus " species like raspberry , have an etaerio of drupelets .
in some bramble fruits fruits fruits fruits fruits fruits fruits fruits fruits fruits mustache , such as blackberry whereupon the receptacle is elongated and part of the ripe fruit , making the blackberry an " aggregate-accessory " fruit .
in all these examples , the fruit develops from a single flower with many pistils .
each flower produces a fruit , but these mature into a single mass .
first an inflorescence of white flowers called a head is produced .
after fertilization , each flower develops into a drupe .
berries are another kind of fruit .
some or all of the edible part of accessory fruit is not generated by the ovary .
accessory fruit can be simple , aggregate , or multiple , i . e . , they can include one or more pistils and other parts from the same flower , or the pistils and other parts of many flowers .
some citrus fruits are valued for their seedlessness .
in some species , seedlessness is the result of " parthenocarpy " , where fruits set without fertilization .
seedless bananas and grapes are triploids , and seedlessness results from the abortion of the embryonic plant that is produced by fertilisation .
variations in fruit structures largely depend on their seeds ' mode of dispersal .
some fruits have coats covered with spikes or hooked burrs .
the sweet flesh of many fruits is “ deliberately ” appealing to animals , so that the seeds held within are eaten and " unwittingly " carried away and deposited deposited deposited elsewhere .
likewise , the nutritious oily kernels of nuts are appealing to rodents squirrels squirrels .
other fruits are elongated and flattened out naturally , and so become thin , like wings or helicopter blades , e . g . elm , maple , and tuliptree .
this is an evolutionary mechanism to increase dispersal distance away from the parent , by wind .
some other fruits can be planted by the water .
some fruits fling seeds substantial distances at up to 100 m in sandbox tree ferns .
many hundreds of fruits , including fleshy fruits fruits fruits fruits fruits fruits fruitsalle like mango , peach , pear , and watermelon inquiries are commercially valuable as human food .
fruits can be high in fiber , vitamin c , and water .
the use of fruit is generally associated with reduced risks of several diseases and functional declines associated with aging .
fruits have been such a major part of the human diet .
the cdc recommends proper fruit handling and preparation to reduce the risk of food contamination and foodborne illness .
fresh fruits and vegetables should be carefully selected .
this recommendation also applies to produce with rinds that are not eaten .
fruits and vegetables should be kept separate from raw foods like meat , poultry , and seafood , as well as from utensils that have come in contact with raw foods .
fruits and vegetables that are not going to be cooked should be thrown away if they have touched raw meat , poultry , seafood , or eggs .
all cut , peeled , or cooked fruits and vegetables should be refrigerated within two hours .
after a certain time , harmful bacteria may grow on them and increase the risk of foodborne illness .
all fruits benefit from proper post harvest care .
keeping most fruits in an efficient cold chain is best for post harvest storage .
