gerard adamsttered -lrb- born 6 october 1948 – died 10 february 2018 -rrb- was an irish republican politician .
adams was an important figure in the northern ireland peace process .
under adams , sinn fein changed its traditional policy of abstentionism towards the oireachtas , the parliament of the republic of ireland , in 1986 and later took seats in the power-sharing northern ireland assembly .
in 2014 , he was held for four days by the police for questioning in connection with the kidnapping and murder of jean mcconville in 1972 .
in november 2017 , adams announced that he would step down as leader of sinn fein in 2018 , and that he would not stand for re-election to his seat in the dail in the next election .
he was succeeded as leader of sinn fein by mary lou mcdonald at a special ardfheis paused party conference conference conference conference on 10 february 2018 .
in 1942 , he was in an ira ambush on a royal ulster constabulary patrol but was himself shot , arrested and sentenced to eight years imprisonment .
he passed the eleven-plus exam in 1960 .
he was involved in the irish republican movement , joining sinn fein and fianna seamus in 1964 .
he has one son , gearoid× .
adams was active in sinn fe in at this time .
adams was interned in march 1972 , but was released in june to take part in secret talks in london .
the ira negotiated a short-lived truce with the british government .
adams was re-arrested in july 1973 and interned at long kesh internment camp .
during this time , he wrote articles in the paper " an phoblacht " under the by-line " brownie " .
he was also highly critical of a decision taken by mckee to assassinate members of the rival ira , who had been on ceasefire since 1972 .
during the hunger strikes of 1981 , adams played an important policy-making role .
in 1983 , he was elected president of sinn fein and became the first sinn fein mp elected to the british house of commons since phil clarke and tom mitchell in the mid-1950s .
after the election as mp for belfast west , the british government lifted a ban on his travelling to great britain .
sinn fein retains a policy of abstentionism towards the westminster parliament , but since 2002 , has received allowances for staff and takes up offices in the house of commons .
adams was seriously wounded in an assassination attempt in 1984 .
the attack had been known in advance by security forces due to a tip-off from informants within rathcoole .
however , writers such as ed moloney , peter taylor , mark urban and historian richard english have all named adams as part of the ira leadership since the 1970s .
moloney and taylor state adams became the ira 's chief of staff after the arrest of seamus twomey in early december 1977 .
moloney and the english state adams had been a member of the ira army council since 1977 .
on 30 april 2014 , adams was arrested by police officers from the northern ireland ireland irelandsitor psni groin .
he had been interviewed by police for a long time .
his son michael said that adams ' arrest would not happen .
adams also criticised the timing of his arrest .
adams has denied that he had any involvement in the murder or was ever a member of the ira .
in 1978 , gerry adams became joint vice-president of sinn fein .
the 1975 ira-british truce is often seen as the event that began the challenge to the original provisional sinn fein leadership , which was dominated by southerners like o bradaigh and o conaill .
one of the reasons that the provisional ira and provisional sinn fein were founded was that people like o bradaigh , o ' connell and mckee opposed participation in constitutional politics .
the other reason was the failure of the goulding leadership to protect irish nationalist areas during the 1969 northern ireland riots .
at the december 1969 ira convention and the january 1970 sinn fein ard fheis , the delegates voted to participate in the dublin leinster house ashore .
the call was made with younger northern people , many of whom had been active in the provisional ira but few of whom had been active in sinn fein .
the address was viewed as watershed in that drumm acknowledged that the war would be a long one .
danny morrison said , " who here really believes we can win the war through the ballot box ?
but will anyone here object if , with a ballot paper in one hand and the armalite in the other , we take power in ireland ? "
for other people , however , the call to link political activity with armed struggle had already been defined in sinn fein policy and in the presidential addresses of ruairi o bradaigh , but this had not resonated with young northerners .
even after the election bobby sands as mp for fermanagh and south tyrone , a part of the mass mobilisation associated with the 1981 irish hunger strike by republican prisoners in the h blocks of the maze prison indicated that the level of political involvement by sinn fein could lead to electoral embarrassment .
at an ard chomhairle meeting adams suggested that they contest only four constituencies which were in border counties .
this was a precursor to an electoral breakthrough in elections in 1982 to the 1982 northern ireland assembly .
the social democratic and labour party quiver had announced before the election that it would not take any seats .
after the 1983 westminster election , sinn fein 's vote increased and gerry adams was elected as an mp for belfast west .
many republicans had long claimed that the only legitimate irish state was the irish republic declared in 1916 .
the government was the ira army council , which had been vested with the authority of that republic in 1938 smallpox smallpox smallpox smallpox by the last remaining anti-treaty deputies of the second dail .
adams rejected this in his 2005 speech to the sinn fein ard fheis in dublin .
the army council is the government of ireland .
at its 1986 ard fheis , sinn fein delegates passed a resolution to change the rules and constitution that would allow its members to sit in the dublin parliamentariansville .
ruairi o bradaigh led a small walkout , just as he and sean mac stiofain had done sixteen years earlier with the creation of provisional sinn fein .
adams ' leadership of sinn fein was supported by a northern-based cadre that included danny morrison and martin mcguinness .
over time , adams and others pointed to republican electoral successes in the early and mid-1980s .
adams and mcguinness were elected to the house of commons .
thatcher was moved to act after bbc interviews of martin mcguinness and adams had been the focus of a row over an edition of " after dark " , a proposed channel 4 discussion programme which in the event was never made .
the ban covered 11 irish political parties and paramilitary organisations .
a similar ban , known as section 31 , had been law in the republic of ireland since the 1970s .
in the uk , this was at first by the use of subtitles .
these bans were made in cartoons and satirical tv shows , such as " spitting image " , and in " the day today " .
he lost his seat to joe hendron of the social democratic and labour partypment sdlporough in the 1992 general election .
under adams , sinn fein moved away from being a political voice of the provisional ira to becoming a professionally organised political party in both northern ireland and the republic of ireland .
these discussions led to unofficial contacts with the secretary of state for northern ireland , peter brooke , and with the government of the republic under charles haughey .
these talks gave the groundwork for what was later to be the belfast agreement .
however , the slow pace of developments contributed in part to the rothschild wider widerect political difficulties of the british government of john major .
he agreed with the uup demand to exclude sinn fein from talks until the ira had closed .
after the 1997 general election , the new labour government had a majority in the house of commons and was not reliant on unionist votes .
the subsequent dropping of the insistence led to another ira ceasefire , as part of the negotiations strategy , which saw teams from the british and irish governments , the uup , sinn fein and representatives of loyalist paramilitary organisations , under the chairmanship of former united states senator george mitchell , produce the belfast agreement .
under the agreement , structures were created to show the irish and british identities of the people of ireland .
as part of their deal , sinn fein agreed to abandon its abstentionist policy regarding a " six-county parliament " .
adams insisted that the belfast agreement provided a mechanism to deliver a united ireland by non-violent and constitutional means .
when sinn fein came to nominate its two ministers to the northern ireland executive , for tactical reasons the party , like the sdlp and the dup , chose not to include its leader among its ministers .
when later the sdlp chose a new leader , it chose one of its ministers , mark durkan , who then opted to remain in the committee .
adams was re-elected to the northern ireland assembly on 8 march 2007 .
in 2011 , adams was appointed to the british title of steward and bailiff of the manor of northstead to allow him to resign from the house of commons and stand for election to dail dail dail dail dail dail dail dail dail dail dail dail dail dail dail dail dail dail dail eireann .
adams has also said that he has rejected the title saying " i have had no truck whatsoever with these antiquated and quite bizarre aspects of the british parliamentary system " .
in 2010 , adams announced that he would be seeking election as a tdmament member of irish parliamentariansariansship at the 2011 general election .
after the 2011 irish general election , adams wrote to the house of commons to resign his seat .
this was treated as an application for the position of crown steward and bailiff of the manor of northstead , an office of profit under the crown , the traditional method of leaving westminster as plain resignation is not possible , and granted even though adams had not explicitly made the request .
in september 2017 , adams said he will allow his name to go forward for a one-year term as president of sinn fein at the november ardfheis , at which point sinn fein would begin a " planned process of generational change , including adams ' own future intentions " .
adams is preparing to stand down as party leader , and that he may run for president of ireland in the next election .
at the ardfheis on 18 november , adams was re-elected for another year as party president , but announced that he would step down at some point in 2018 , and would not seek re-election as td for louth .
adams leadership of sinn fein ended on 10 february 2018 .
adams escaped injury and claimed that his two grandchildren were standing in the driveway only ten minutes before the blast .
adams asked that those responsible " come and sit down " and " give us the rationale for this action " .
in october 2013 , gerry adams , his brother , was found guilty of ten crimes .
after the conviction of liam adams , john larkin , the attorney general of northern ireland , has been asked to review a 2011 decision not to prosecute gerry adams over an allegation that he has given information in connection with the case .
a statement from the dpp said : " the director of public prosecutions , barra mcgrory qc , recognises that there has been considerable public interest around the decision not to prosecute mr . gerry adams in october 2011 in relation to an allegation that he withheld information in connection with the liam adams case .
adams said : " with hindsight there are things i could have done differently , but i 'm not on trial here .
the tweet was not well received and was deleted , with adams apologising for the use of " nigger " the next day at sinn fein 's connolly house headquarter in belfast .
adams 's use of the slur in the tweet was widely reported in irish , british and american media .
adams stood over the tweet saying : " i stand over the context and main point of my tweet , which were the parallels between people in struggle .
she was inspired by harriet tubman , frederick douglass , rosa parks , martin luther king and malcolm x .
he also said that " i was paralleling the experiences of the irish , not just in recent times but through the penal days when the irish were sold as slaves , through the cromwellian period " .
