amateur is generally considered a person who pursues a particular activity or field of study independently from their source of income .
amateur and their pursuits are also described as popular , informal , self-taught , user-generated , diy , and hobbyist .
historically , the amateur was considered to be the ideal balance between pure intent , open mind and the interest or passion for a subject .
that ideology spanned many different fields of interest .
it may have had its roots in the ancient greek philosophy of having amateur athletes compete in the olympics .
the ancient greek citizens would spend most of their time in other pursuits , but would compete according to their natural talents and abilities .
the " gentleman amateur " was a phenomenon in the gentry of great britain from the 17th century until even the 20th century .
with the start of the age of reason , people thinking more about how the world works around them , traded things like the cabinet of curiosities , and the writing of the book " the christian virtuoso " , started to shape the idea of the amateur gentleman .
he was a person who was vastly interested in a particular topic .
the royal society in great britain was generally composed of these " gentleman amateurs " .
a few examples of these are sir francis bacon , isaac newton , and sir robert cotton , 1st baronet , of connington .
amateurism can be seen in both a negative and positive light .
amateur work may be considered sub-par .
for example , amateur athletes in sports such as basketball , baseball or football are regarded as having a lower level of ability than professional athletes .
on the other hand , an amateur may be in a position to approach a subject with an open mindocation because there was no formal training .
an amateur who dabbles in a field out of interest rather than as a profession , or who possesses a general but superficial interest in any art or a branch of knowledge , is often referred to as a dilettante .
the line between " amateur " and " professional " has always been blurred in athletics .
the lack of money can be seen as a sign of commitment to a sport .
receiving payment to participate in an event disqualified an athlete from that event .
the only olympic events that still require participants to be amateurs are boxing , wrestling and figure skating .
many amateurs make valuable contributions in the field of computer programming through the open source movement .
amateur dramatics is the performance of plays or musical theatre , often to high standards , but lacks the budgets of professional west end or broadway performances .
astronomy , chemistry , history , linguistics , and the natural sciences are among the fields that have benefited from the activities of amateurs .
charles darwin and gregor mendel were amateur scientists who never held a position in their study .
william shakespeare and leonardo da vinci were considered amateur artists and autodidacts in their fields of study .
the first astronomy company was grote reber , a german radio operator .
he started out by tinkering with a coherer and a spark coil as an amateur electrician .
pierre de fermat was a highly influential mathematician .
amateur and professional has become more blurred in areas such as computer programming , music and astronomy .
amateur professionalism is a term used to describe these activities .
