genesis is the first book of the bible , the old testament , and the first book of judaism .
it is divisible into two parts , the primeval history historians historians historians historians historians estimate the history of the island .
the primeval history sets out the author 's wouldn or authors ' concepts of the nature of the deity and of humankind 's relationship with its maker : god creates a world which is good and fit for mankind , but when man corrupts it with sin will destroy his creation , saving only the righteous relationship between man and noah to reestablish the righteous noah to reestablish the man .
the ancestral history of israel is the history of god .
at god 's command , abraham goes from his home to live in the land of canaan .
the agency of his son joseph , the children of israel descend into egypt , 70 people in all with their households , and god promises them a future of greatness .
genesis ends with israel in egypt , ready for the coming of moses and the exodus .
the story is punctuated by a series of covenants with god , successively narrowing in scope from all mankindologically .
in judaism , genesis centers on the covenants that connected god to his chosen people and the people to the promised land .
genesis is the prefiguration of certain cardinal christian beliefs .
modern scholars think that moses was the author of the books of exodus , leviticus , numbers and most of deuteronomy .
genesis appears to be structured around the recurring phrase " elleh toledot " , meaning " these are the generations " .
the history of the story is based on subject matter .
the first is far shorter than the second .
the " primeval history " is the story of the flood mirrored by the events after the flood .
isaac is a bridge between abraham and jacob .
god created the universe in six days .
adam and eve are the first humans in the garden of eden .
adam throws them out and curses them , adam to get what he needs only by sweat and work , and eve giving birth in pain .
christians thought this is the fall of humanity .
eve was the father of cain and abel .
after zeus killed abel , abel was found not cain 's .
after this , cain curses cain .
eve 's son , seth , took abel 's place .
after many generations of adam have passed from the lines of cain and seth , the world becomes corrupted by human sin and nephilim , and determines to wipe out humanity .
he tells the righteous noah and his family to build an ark .
god then sends a great flood to kill the people who are not there .
god promises that he will never destroy the earth with water again , using the rainbow as a sign of his promise .
god sees mankind cooperating to build a great tower city , the tower of babel , and divides humanity with many languages and sets them apart with confusion .
god tells abram to travel from his home in mesopotamia to the land of canaan .
there , god makes a promise with abram , and that his descendants shall be as numerous as the stars , but that people will suffer oppression in a foreign land for four hundred years , after which they will inherit the land from the river of egypt to the great river , the river euphrates .
the name of abram is changed to abraham , and that of his wife sarai to sarah , and circumcision of all males is the sign of the covenant .
sarah tells abraham to take her egyptian handmaiden , hagar , as a second wife .
through hagar , abraham 's son ishmael ishmael .
god destroyed the cities of sodom and gomorrah for the sins of their people .
abraham protests against god to say that he should not destroy the cities for the sake of ten righteous men .
angels save abraham 's nephew lot and his family , but his wife looks back on the destruction against their command .
lot 's daughters get him drunk to become pregnant by him .
abraham and sarah go to gerar , a town in gerar .
the king of gerar takes sarah for his wife , but god warns him to return her , and he obeys .
sarah is the son of isaac , the god of the covenant .
sarah drives ishmael and his mother hagar out into the wilderness , but god saves them and promises to make ishmael a great nation .
god tested abraham 's loyalty by asking him to kill isaac .
abraham is about to lay the knife on his son , god restrains him , promising him numberless descendants .
after proving herself , rebekah becomes isaac 's betrothed .
abraham 's wife , keturah , has more children , among whose descendants are the midianites .
abraham died at a prosperous old age .
isaac 's wife , esau , was the father of the edomites .
he is the heir instead of esau and gains his father 's blessing .
he runs away to his uncle and earns his two wives .
jacob 's name is changed to israel , and by his wives and their handmaidens he has twelve sons , the ancestors of the twelve tribes of the children of israel , and a daughter , dinah .
joseph , his brothers and brothers make him jealous .
joseph prospers , after hardship , with god 's guidance of interpreting pharaoh 's dream of upcoming famine .
he is reunited with his father and brothers , who fail to recognize him , and plead for food .
after much manipulation , he reveals himself and lets them and their households into egypt , where pharaoh assigns them the land of goshen .
jacob blessed his sons and then died .
joseph lives to an old age .
genesis takes its hebrew title from the first word of the first sentence , " bereshit " , meaning " in the beginning of " .
the text is written in the bible , the samaritan pentateuch , the septuagint , and fragments of genesis found at qumran .
the qumran group provides the oldest manuscripts but covers only a small proportion of the book .
for much of the 20th century , most scholars agreed that the five books of the pentateuch — genesis , exodus , leviticus , numbers and deuteronomy — came from four sources , the yahwist , the elohist , the deuteronomist and the priestly source , each telling the basic story , and together by various editors .
since the 1970s there has been a revolution leading scholars to view the elohist source as no more than a variation on the yahwist , and the priestly source as a body of revisions and expansions to the yahwisthesis or " non-priestly " material .
this is because the deuteronomistic source does not appear in genesis .
scholars use some examples of repeated and duplicate stories to identify the separate sources .
in genesis , there are three stories of a patriarch who said that his wife was his sister , the two creation stories , and the two versions of abraham sending hagar and ishmael into the desert .
this is the question of when these works were created .
scholars in the first half of the 20th century came to the conclusion that the yahwist is a product of the monarchic period .
the book was created , a theory which has gained considerable interest , although still controversial is " persian imperial authorisation " .
this suggests that the persians of the achaemenid empire , after their conquest of babylon in 539 bc , agreed to grant jerusalem a large measure of local autonomy within the empire , but required the local authorities to produce a single law code accepted by the entire community .
the two powerful groups that controlled the temple and who traced their origin to moses and the wilderness wanderings , and the major landowning families who made up the " elders " and who traced their own origins to abraham , who had " given them the land " , were in conflict over many issues , and provided a promise to produce a very powerful man from the native people .
genesis is best seen as an example of a creation myth , a type of literature telling of the stories of ancestors and heroes , and the origins of culture , cities and so forth .
the most notable examples are in the work of greek historians of the 6th century bc : their intention was to connect notable families of their own day to a distant and heroic past , and in doing so they did not distinguish between myth , legend , and facts .
professor jean-louis ska of the pontifical biblical institute says that the basic rule of the antiquarian historian the " law of conservation " : everything old is valuable , nothing is eliminated .
ska also points out the purpose behind such antiquarian histories : antiquity is needed to prove the worth of israel 's traditions to the nationsports and to reconcile and unite the various factions within israel itself .
in 1978 david clines published his influential book " the theme of the pentateuch " .
clines ' conclusion was that the overall theme is " the partial fulfillment -lrb- which implies also the partial nonfulfillment -rrb- of the promise to or blessing of the patriarchs . "
at the end of deuteronomy the people are still outside canaanrford .
the patriarchs , or ancestors , are abraham , isaac and jacob .
since the name yhwh had not been known to them , they worshipped el in his various manifestations .
although although it is , worth noting that in the jahwist source the patriarchs refer to deity by the name yhwh , for example in genesis 15 .
through the patriarchs god announces the election of israel , meaning that he has chosen israel to be his special people and committed himself to their future .
god tells the patriarchs that he will be faithful to their descendants ashore .
according to the hebrew bible , it means " faith " .
the promise itself has three parts : the offspring , blessings , and land .
the story is constantly complicated by the fact that each prospective mother-sarah , rebekah and rachel – is barren .
the ancestors , however , keep their faith in god and god in each case gives a son .
this promises that the three promises attains a more rich fulfillment , until through joseph " all the world " attains salvation from famine , and by bringing the children of israel down to egypt , through which the promise can be fulfilled .
scholars generally agree that the theme of divine promise unites the patriarchal cycles , but many would dispute the efficacy of trying to examine genesis ' theology by pursuing a single overarching theme , instead citing as more productive the analysis of the abraham cycle , the jacob cycle , and the yahwist and priestly sources .
the problem is in finding a way to unite the patriarchal theme of divine promise to the stories of genesis 1 – 11 dynasties the primeval history would represent the characters in the face of man 's evil nature .
god creates the world and mankind , mankind rebels , and god " elects " chooses abraham .
each has its own sign .
the first covenant is between god and all living creatures , and is marked by the sign of the rainbow ; the second is with the descendants of abrahamciful ishmaelites and others as well as the hebrews .
a great leader mediates each covenant across the world , abraham , moses showed himself by his name ulysses , elohim with noah , yahweh with abraham , yahweh with moses , abraham , yahwehweh with moses , abraham , yahwehweh with moses , abraham , yahwehweh with moses , abraham , yahwehweh with moses , abraham , yahwehweh with moses , abraham , yahwehwehweh with moses , abraham , yahwehwehweh with moses , abraham , yahwehwehweh with moses , abraham , yahwehwehweh with moses , abraham , yahwehwehwehweh with moses , abraham , abraham , yahwehwehwehweh with moses , abraham , yahwehwehweh with moses , abraham , yahweh
