whist is a classic english trick-taking card game .
the rules are simple , but there is scope for scientific play .
whist is a descendant of the 16th century game of " trump " or " ruff " .
the trump version was replaced by whist .
the game takes its name from the 17th century whist -lrb- or " wist " foley -rrb- meaning " quiet " , " silent " , " attentive " , which is the root of the modern " wistful " .
the first time was played on scientific principles by a party of gentlemen who lived in the crown coffee house in bedford row , london around 1728 .
edmond hoyle , who was a member of this group , began to tutor wealthy young gentlemen in the game and published " a short treatise on the game of whist " in 1742 .
it became the standard text and rules for the game for the next 100 years .
in 1862 henry jones , writing under the pseudonym " cavendish " , published " the principles of whist stated and explained , and its practice illustrated on an original system , by means of hands played completely through " , which became the standard text .
after that , the title was changed to " cavendish on whist " .
by this time whist was governed by rules covering the laws of the game , etiquette and play which took time to study and master .
in the 1890s , a variant known as bridge whist became popular .
the traditional game of whist is still played at social events called " whist drives " .
there are many different types of whist .
a standard 52-card pack is used .
the cards in each suit rank from highest to lowest : a k q j 10 9 8 7 4 3 .
whist is played by four players .
players draw cards to determine partners , with the two highest playing against the two lowest .
to comment on the cards in any way is strictly against the rules .
one may not comment upon the hand one was dealt or about one 's good fortune or bad fortune .
one may signal to one 's partner .
the cards can be walked by any player , though the player to dealer 's left .
the dealer has the right to shuffle last if they wish .
to speed up dealing , a second pack can be walked by the dealer 's partner during the deal and then placed to the right ready for the next hand .
the cards are cut by the player on dealer 's right before dealing .
the dealer deals out all the cards face down , so that each player has thirteen cards .
the final card , which belongs to the dealer , is turned face up to show which suit is trumps .
the turn-up trump card is face up on the table until it is the dealer 's turn to play to the first trick , at which point the dealer may pick up the card and place it in their hand .
the deal goes clockwise .
the player to the left leads to the first trick .
he may lead any card in his hand .
the other players play a card to the trick .
a player with no card of the suit led may play any card , either discarding or trumping .
the highest trump wins .
the winner of the trick leads the next trick .
all the tricks are played , at which point the score is recorded .
if a player has enough points to win the game , another player is played .
part of the game is one 's ability to remember what cards have been played and reason out what cards remain .
the player who wins the game is called the cards are turned face down and kept in a stack of four near the player who won the trick .
before the next trick starts , a player may ask to review the cards from the last trick only .
once the lead card is played , however , no previously played cards can be reviewed by anyone .
after all tricks have been played , the side which won more tricks scores 1 point for each trick won in excess of 6 .
when all four players are experienced , it is unusual for the score for a single hand to be higher than two .
a game is over when one team reaches a score of five .
there are many different hotel rules where other numbers are agreed to be played to in advance such as " american " and " long " , where the games are played to seven and nine respectively .
the long version is normally combined with " honours " .
in longer version of the game , those games where the winning score is not the standard 5 points , they are points that are claimed at the end of each hand .
honours add nothing to the play of a hand .
honours serve only as an element of luck that speeds up games , and they are often omitted .
serious players disdaining , because it greatly increases chance .
a team that was dealt the top four cardsanor a , k , q , j foley in the trump suit collect extra points .
a team who holds three of the four honors between them claim 2 points .
tricks are scored before honours .
points can be used for the last point of a game .
for example : a game is being played to 9 points .
the score is tied at 6 .
the winner of that hand took seven tricks and claimed honours .
that team would receive 1 point for the 7th trick and only 1 point for honours .
the score would then be 8 to 6 .
a whist drive is a social event at which progressive games of whist are played .
whist has long been noted for its influence upon what is termed the calculating power ; and men of the highest order of intellect have been known to take an apparently unaccountable delight in it , . . "
he won at this quiet game , so good to his nature . "
