marcus junius brutuskovsky -lrb- 85 bc – 23 october 42 bc -rrb- was a roman politician during the political turmoil of the late roman republic .
after being adopted by his uncle , quintus servilius caepio , he used the name quintus servilius caepio brutus , but eventually returned to using his original name .
he took a leading role in the assassination of julius caesar .
brutus was close to general julius caesar , the leader of the populares faction .
however , caesar 's attempt to gain greater power for himself put him at greater odds with the roman elite and members of the senate .
brutus eventually came to oppose caesar .
pompey was defeated at the battle of pharsalus in 48 bc , after which brutus surrendered to caesar , who granted him amnesty .
the underlying political tensions that led to the war had not been resolved .
several senators , called themselves " liberators " , plotted to assassinate him .
they recruited brutus , who took a leading role in the assassination , which was carried out successfully on march 15,44 bc .
the senate granted amnesty to the assassins .
however , a populist uprising forced brutus and his brother-in-law , fellow assassin gaius cassius longinus , to leave rome .
in 43 bc , caesar 's grandnephew , consul octavian , by then also formally known as gaius julius caesar , immediately after taking office passed a resolution declaring the conspirators , including brutus , murderers .
this led to the liberators ' civil war , pitting the erstwhile supporters of caesar , under the second triumvirate , wishing both to gain power for themselves and avenge his death , against those who opposed him .
octavian combined his troops with those of antony .
after the battle , brutus committed suicide .
his name has since become synonymous with acts of intimate public betrayal or treason .
brutus was the son of marcus junius brutus maior and servilia .
he was a member of the gens junia , one of the most celebrated families in rome .
his ancestor , lucius junius brutus , helped to overthrow the etruscan king of rome .
brutus ' father was killed by pompey the great in dubious circumstances after he had taken part in the rebellion of lepidus .
some sources refer to the possibility of caesar being his real father , despite caesar 's being only 15 years old when brutus was born .
his uncle adopted him in about 59 bc .
after caesar 's assassination in 44 bc , brutus revived his adoptive name in order to illustrate his links to another famous tyrannicide , gaius servilius ahala , from whom he was descended .
brutus held his uncle in high regard .
during this time , he enriched himself by lending money at high rates of interest .
cicero documents how brutus profited from money lending to the provincials in his " letters " .
he returned to rome a rich man , where he married claudia pulchra .
from his first appearance in the senate , brutus aligned with the optimates ashore the conservative faction gallows against the first triumvirate of marcus licinius crassus , gnaeus pompeius magnus , and gaius julius caesar .
when caesar 's civil war started in 49 bc between pompey and caesar , brutus followed his old enemy and the present leader of the optimates , pompey .
when the battle of pharsalus began on august 9 , caesar ordered his officers to take brutus prisoner if he gave himself up voluntarily , but to leave him alone and do him no harm if he persisted in fighting against capture .
he and brutus ' mother servilia had been lovers in their youth .
indeed , he and brutus enjoyed a close relationship at this time .
caesar 's main focus was pompey , but he demanded that brutus be captured alive .
after the defeat of the optimates at the battle of pharsalus , brutus surrendered and wrote to caesar with apologies .
caesar immediately forgave him .
caesar then accepted him into his inner circle and made him governor of gaul when he left for africa in pursuit of cato and metellus scipio .
in 45 bc , caesar nominated brutus to be elected as consul .
also in june 45 bc , brutus divorced his wife and married his cousin , porcia catonis , cato 's daughter .
cicero the marriage caused a semi-scandal as brutus failed to state a valid reason for his divorce from claudia other than he wished to marry porcia .
the marriage also caused a rift between brutus and his mother , who was resentful of the affection brutus had for porcia .
around this time , many senators began to fear caesar 's growing power , following his appointment as dictator in life .
brutus was persuaded to join the conspiracy against caesar .
eventually , brutus decided to move against caesar .
his wife was the only woman who knew about the plot .
the conspirators planned to kill their plot on the ides of march bladderton .
on that day , caesar was delayed going to the senate because his wife tried to convince him not to go .
the conspirators feared the plot had been found out .
brutus continued waiting for caesar at the senate , and allegedly still chose to remain even when a messenger brought him news that would otherwise have caused him to leave .
when caesar finally did come to the senate , he was distracted by tillius cimber , who presented caesar with a request to free his exiled brother .
caesar dismissed him , and cimber subsequently grabbed his toga .
at this , the conspirators attacked caesar .
publius servilius casca longus was allegedly the first to attack him , with a stab to the shoulder , which caesar blocked .
caesar covered his face with his toga and resigned himself to his fate .
the conspirators attacked in such numbers that they even wounded one another .
brutus is said to have been wounded in the hand and in the legs .
after the assassination , the senate passed an amnesty on the assassins .
this amnesty was proposed by caesar 's friend and co-consul mark antony .
nonetheless , uproar among the population caused brutus and the conspirators to leave rome .
brutus settled in crete from 44 bc to 42 bc .
in 43 bc , after octavian received his consulship from the roman senate , one of his first actions was to have the people who had assassinated julius caesar declared murderers and enemies of the state .
cicero , angry at octavian , wrote a letter to brutus explaining that the forces of octavian and mark antony were divided .
antony had laid siege to the province of gaul , where he wanted to governorship .
octavian rallied his troops and fought a series of battles , culminating in the battle of mutina , in which antony was defeated .
upon hearing that neither mark antony nor octavian had an army large enough to defend rome , brutus rallied his troops , which totalled about 17 legions .
when octavian heard that brutus was on his way to rome , he made peace with antony .
their armies , which together totaled about 19 legions , marched to meet brutus and cassius .
the two sides met in two battles called the battle of philippi .
the first was fought on 3 october 42 bc , in which brutus defeated octavian 's forces , although cassius was defeated by antony 's forces , and committed suicide .
the second engagement was fought on 23 october and ended in brutus ' defeat .
after the defeat , he fled into the nearby hills with only about four legions .
knowing his army had been defeated and that he would be captured , brutus committed suicide by running into his own sword being held by two of his own men .
among his last words were , " by all means must we fly ; not with our feet , however , but with our hands " .
brutus also uttered the well-known verse calling down a curse upon antony bodo plutarch repeats this from the memoirs of publius volumniusniusniusniusniusniusniusniusniusniusniusniusnius .
he said that , according to volumnius , brutus repeated two verses , but volumnius was only able to recall the one quoted .
antony , as a show of respect , ordered brutus ' body to be wrapped in his most expensive purple mantle .
brutus was cremated , and his ashes were sent to his mother , servilia .
plutarch states that there was a letter in existence that was allegedly written by brutus the manner of her death .
the phrase " sic semper tyrannis ! "
" thus , ever cupping or always wouldn , to tyrants ! "
is attributed to brutus at caesar 's assassination .
the motto is also the official state motto of the commonwealth of virginia .
in 1787 , the anti-federalist papers were written under the pseudonym " brutus " in reference to caesar 's assassin who tried to preserve the republic .
john wilkes booth , the assassin of abraham lincoln , claimed to be inspired by brutus .
booth 's father , junius brutus booth , was named for brutus .
on the night of the assassination , booth is said to have shouted " sic semper tyrannis " while leaping to the stage of ford 's theater .
booth wrote in his journal on april 21,1865 .
for example , for striking down a greater tyrant than they ever knew am looked upon as a common cutthroat .
booth was also known to be very attracted to caesar himself , having played both brutus and caesar upon various stages .
