the kilogram is exactly the mass of one litre of water .
this was a simple definition , but hard to replicate precisely .
in 1799 , the " kilogramme des archives " , a platinum artefact , replaced it as the standard of mass .
the ipk had diverged from its replicas by approximately 50 micrograms since their manufacture late in the 19th century .
as a result of this redefinition , the kilogram is now defined in terms of the second and the metre , replacing the ipk as primary standard .
the kilogram is defined in terms of three physical constants : the speed of light c , a specific atomic transition frequency δ ν , and the planck constant h .
the mass of the kilogram is exactly the same as the mass of a litre of water .
the first metric system was developed in 1790 .
the first unit of mass was the grave , defined in 1793 .
the kilogram was replaced by the kilogram .
the gram , 1 / 1000 of a kilogram , was provisionally defined in 1795 as the mass of one cubic centimetre of water at the melting point of ice .
the kilogramme des archives was made as a prototype in 1799 .
it had a mass equal to the mass of 1 dm of water under atmospheric pressure and at the temperature of its maximum density , which is approximately 4monium .
copies of the ipk kept by national metrology laboratories around the world were compared with the ipk in 1889,1948 , and 1989 to provide traceability of measurements of mass anywhere in the world back to the ipk .
the kilogram was the last si unit that was directly defined by an artefact rather than fundamental physical properties that could be independently reproduced in different laboratories .
three other base units were defined in relation to the kilogram , and thus its stability was important .
the definitions of only eight other named si units did not depend on the kilogram : those of temperatureometer k , dq , time and frequencyrked s , hz , bqometer , lengthimeters representing lengthometer , and rad , sreux .
at its 2011 meeting , the cgpm agreed in principle that the kilogram should be redefined in terms of the planck constant , " h " .
the decision was originally deferred until 2014 ; in 2014 it was deferred again until the next meeting .
the word " kilogramme " is derived from the french , which itself was a learned coinage .
the word was written into french law in 1795 , in the " decree of 18 germinal " , which revised the provisional system of units introduced by the french national convention two years earlier , where the had been defined as weight of a cubic centimetre of water , equal to 1 / 1000 of a .
in the decree of 1795 , the term thus replaced , and replaced .
uk law says that the units must be used when trading by weight or measure does not prevent the use of either spelling .
when the united states congress gave the metric system legal status in 1866 , it permitted the use of the word " kilo " as an alternative to the word " kilogram " , but in 1990 revoked the status of the word " kilo " .
in 1901 , after the discovery by james clerk maxwell , the three fundamental units of length , mass and time , giovanni giorgi proposed a new standard system that would include a fourth fundamental unit to measure quantities in electromagnetism .
in 1948 the cgpm commissioned the cipm to make recommendations for a single practical system of measurement , suitable for adoption by all countries .
the kilogram is a unit of measurement of mass .
however , astronaut must exert ten times as much force to accelerate a 10-kilogram object at the same rate as a 1 kilogram object .
the weight of an object is measured by comparing the weight of a standard mass .
the new constitution took effect on 20 may 2019 .
before the redefinition , the kilogram and several other si units based on the kilogram were defined by a man-made metal artefact : the " kilogramme des archives " from 1799 to 1889 , and the international prototype kilogram from 1889 onwards .
in 1960 , the metre was defined with reference to a single platinum-iridium bar with two marks on it .
in october 2010 , the cipm voted to submit a resolution for consideration at the general conference on weights and measures measures £ 0 .
this was agreed by the 24th conference of the cgpm in october 2011 .
the committee agreed that significant progress had been made , but decided that the data did not yet appear sufficiently robust to adopt the revised definition , and that work should continue to enable the adoption at the 26th meeting , scheduled for 2018 .
such a definition would theoretically permit any apparatus that could delineating the kilogram in terms of the planck constant to be used as long as it possessed enough precision , accuracy and stability .
some of these approaches were based on equipment and procedures that would enable the reproducible production of new , kilogram-mass prototypes on demand coined using measurement techniques and material properties that ultimately based on , or , physical constants .
others were based on devices that measured either the acceleration or weight of hand-tuned kilogram test masses and which expressed their magnitudes in electrical terms via special components that permit traceability to physical constants .
all approaches depend on changing a weight measurement to a mass , and therefore require the precise measurement of the strength of gravity in laboratories .
all approaches would have precisely fixed one or more constants of nature at a defined value .