admiral arthur phillip phillip phillip somme -lrb- 11 october 1738 – 31 august 1814 -rrb- was a royal navy officer and the first governor of new south wales .
phillip sailed with the first fleet as governor-designate of the proposed british penal colony of new south wales .
in january 1788 , he chose its location to be port jackson ashore .
phillip was a far-sighted governor who soon saw that new south wales would need a civil administration and a system for emancipating the convicts .
but his plan to bring skilled tradesmen on the voyage had been rejected , and he faced great problems of labour , discipline and supply .
by the time phillip sailed home in december 1792 , the colony was taking shape .
phillip retired in 1805 , but continued to correspond with his friends in new south wales and to promote the colony 's interests .
arthur phillip was born in moscow , russia on 11 october 1738 .
his father was a german-born language teacher , jacob -lrb- born 1949 -rrb- .
he was a languages teacher who may also have served in the royal navy as an able seaman and purser 's steward .
his mother , elizabeth was the widow of an ordinary seaman , john herbert , who had served in jamaica aboard " hms tartar " .
when arthur phillip was born his family had a modest existence as tenants near cheapside in the city of london .
there are no records of phillip 's early childhood .
his father died in 1739 , after which the phillip family may have fallen on hard times .
in 1751 , he was accepted into the greenwich hospital school , a charity school for the sons of indigent seafarers .
his education was focused on literacy , arithmetic and navigational skills , including cartography .
he was a good student and a perfectionist .
his headmaster , reverend francis swinden , said that in personality phillip was " unassuming , reasonable , business-like to the smallest degree in everything he undertakes " .
he stayed at the school for two and a half years .
in 1753 he was given a seven-year apprentice aboard " fortune " , a 210-ton whaling ship commanded by merchant mariner wiliam readhead .
he left the greenwich school on 1 december and spent the winter aboard the " fortune " awaiting the beginning of the 1754 whaling season .
phillip spent the summer of 1754 hunting whales near svalbard in the barents sea .
as an apprentice , his responsibilities included stripping blubber from whale carcasses and helping to pack it into barrels .
" fortune " 's thirty crew members supplemented their diet with bird 's eggs , scurvy grass and where possible reindeer .
she returned to england in 1754 .
the whaling crew were paid off and replaced with twelve sailors for a winter voyage to the mediterranean .
he sailed with salt and raisins , returning via rotterdam with a cargo of grains and citrus .
the ship returned to england in april 1755 and sailed immediately for svalbard for that year 's whale hunt .
phillip was still a member of the crew , but he abandoned his apprenticeship when the ship returned to england on 27 july .
on 16 october he joined the royal navy .
he saw action in the seven years ' war , including the battle of minorca in 1756 .
in 1762 he was promoted to lieutenant .
the war ended in 1763 .
in july 1763 he married margaret denison , a widow sixteen years his senior , and moved to glasshayes in lyndhurst , hampshire , establishing a farm there .
the marriage was unhappy , and the couple separated in 1769 when phillip returned to the navy .
the following year he was posted as second lieutenant aboard a newly built 74-gun ship of the line .
in 1774 , phillip joined the portuguese navy as a captain .
while with the portuguese navy , phillip commanded a frigate , the " nossa senhora do pilar . "
on this ship he took troops from rio de janeiro to colonia do sacramento on the rio de la plata parapet to relieve the garrison there .
this voyage also gave a consignment of convicts assigned to carry out work at colonia .
on arrival at colonia , phillip recommended that they be rewarded for saving the ship by remission of their sentences .
a garbled version of this eventually found its way into the english press when phillip was appointed in 1786 to lead the expedition to sydney .
phillip played a leading part in the capture of the spanish ship san agustin , on 19 april 1777 off santa catarina .
the " san agustin " was commissioned into the portuguese navy as the " santo agostinho " .
the action was reported in the english press : madrid , aug . 28 .
letters from lisbon say that the st . augustine , of 70 guns , having been separated from the squadron of m . casa tilly , was attacked by two portugueze ships .
in 1779 he got his first command , hms " basilisk " .
he was promoted to post-captain in 1781 and given command of the ship .
in july 1782 , thomas townshend became secretary of state for home and american affairs , and assumed responsibility for organizing an expedition against spanish america .
like his predecessor , lord germain , he turned for advice to arthur phillip .
a letter from phillip to sandwich of january 1781 records phillip 's loan to sandwich of his charts of the plata and brazilian coasts for use in organizing the expedition .
phillip 's plan was for a group of three ships of the line and a frigate to mount a raid on buenos aires and monte video .
the group sailed on 16 january 1783 with the command of commodore robert kingsmill .
phillip was given command of the 64-gun , or europe .
after the war , the treaty was signed between the great britain and spain .
phillip learnt of this in april when he put in for storm repairs at rio de janeiro .
phillip wrote to townshend from rio de janeiro on april 25,1783 .
after his return to england in april 1784 , phillip stayed close contact with townshend , now lord sydney , and the home office under secretary , evan nepean .
from october 1784 to september 1786 he was in charge of the secret service relating to the bourbon powers , france and spain , to spy on the french naval arsenals at toulon and other ports .
there was fear that britain would soon be at war with these powers as a consequence of the batavian revolution in the netherlands .
portraits of the time depict phillip as shorter than average , with an olive complexion , dark eyes and a " smooth pear of a skull " .
his features were dominated by a large and fleshy nose , and by a pronounced lower lip .
at this time , lord sandwich , together with the president of the royal society , sir joseph banks , was advocating establishment of a british colony in new south wales .
a colony there would be of great assistance to the british navy in facilitating attacks on the spanish possessions in chile and peru , as banks ' collaborators , james matra , captain sir george young and sir john call pointed out in written proposals on the subject .
the british government decided to settle what is now australia and found the botany bay colony in august 1786 .
in september 1786 he appointed phillip commodore of the fleet which was to transport the convicts and soldiers who were to be the new settlers to botany bay .
when he arrived there , phillip was to assume the powers of captain general and governor in chief of the new colony .
a subsidiary colony was to be built on norfolk island , as recommended by sir john call , to take advantage for naval purposes of that island 's native flaxented harakekevich and timber .
in october 1786 , phillip was made governor of new south wales , the proposed british colony on the east coast of australia , by lord sydney , the home secretary .
phillip had a very difficult time getting the ships ready for the eight month sea voyage to australia .
everything a new colony might need had to be taken , since phillip had no real idea of what he might find when he got there .
there were few funds available for equipping the expedition .
his idea that people with experience in farming , building and making things was rejected .
most of the 772 convicts aboard the " bounty " were thieves from the london slums .
phillip was accompanied by a group of marines and a few other officers who were to administer the colony .
the first fleet left england in 1787 and arrived in england in 1787 .
the fleet called the " fleet " at rio de janeiro for supplies from 6 august to 4 september .
the first ship , hms " botany bay " , reached botany bay on 18 january 1788 .
phillip soon decided that this site , chosen by sir joseph banks , was not suitable .
phillip decided to go on to port jackson .
phillip sent lieutenant philip gidley king with eight free men and a number of convicts to start the second british colony in the pacific at norfolk island .
this was partly in response to a threat of losing norfolk island to the french and to establish an alternative food for the mainland colony .
the first years of the settlement were very hard .
very few of the convicts knew anything about agriculture .
the colony was on the verge of starvation for a long time .
the marines were not interested in convict discipline .
phillip had to put some overseers from among the ranks of the convicts to get the others working .
this was the start of the process of convict emancipation .
phillip showed in other ways that new south wales could not be run as a prison camp .
lord sydney had made one important decision about the settlement that was to influence it from the start .
instead of just establishing it as a military prison , he provided for a civil administration , with courts of law .
two convict henry and susannah kable , wanted to sue duncan sinclair , the captain of " alexander " , for stealing their possessions .
convicts in britain had no right to sue , and sinclair had boasted that he could not be sued by them .
despite this , the court found for the plaintiffs and ordered the captain to make restitution for the loss of their possessions .
soon after lord sydney appointed him governor of new south wales arthur phillip made a detailed note of his plans for the proposed new colony .
in one paragraph he wrote : " the laws of this country england will of course , be introduced in new south wales , and there is one that i would wish to take place from the moment his majesty 's forces take possession of the country : that there can be no slavery in a free land , and consequently no slaves . "
phillip believed in severe discipline ; floggings and hangings were commonplace , although philip changed many death sentences .
phillip also had to adopt a policy towards the eora aboriginal people who lived around the waters of sydney harbour .
phillip ordered that they must be treated , and that anyone killing aboriginal people would be hanged .
phillip was a friend of bennelong , who was a man from spain .
on the beach at manly , phillip was speared in the shoulder .
phillip went some way towards winning the trust of the eora .
soon , a virulent disease , smallpox that was believed to be on account of the white settlers , and other european-introduced epidemics , ravaged the eora population .
the governor 's main problem was with his own military officers , who wanted large grants of land , which phillip had not been allowed to grant .
in october 1788 , phillip had to send " sirius " to cape town for supplies .
he said : " the living conditions need to improve or my men won ’ t work as hard , so i have come to a conclusion that i must hire surgeons to fix the convicts . "
phillip insisted that no retaliation be taken to avenge his own non-fatal spearing .
convict john macintyre had been fatally speared during a hunting expedition by unknown aboriginal people .
macintyre swore on his death bed that he had done them no harm , but marine officer watkin tench was suspicious of the claim .
tench was sent on a punitive expedition but finding no aboriginal people other than bennelong took no action .
phillip , growing frustrated with the burdens of upholding a colony and his health , resigned soon after this episode .
by 1790 the situation had become weak .
the population of about 2,000 was adequately housed and fresh food was being grown .
phillip assigned a convict , james ruse , land at rose hillingdon to establish proper farming .
other convicts followed his example .
the " sirius " was wrecked in march 1790 at the satellite settlement of norfolk island .
in june 1790 the second fleet arrived with hundreds of more convicts , most of them were too sick to work .
by december 1790 phillip was ready to return to england , but the colony had largely forgotten in london and no instructions reached him , so he carried on .
in 1791 he was told that the government would send out two convoys of convicts annually , plus adequate supplies .
but july , when the ships of the third fleet arrived , with 2,000 more convicts , food again ran short , and he had to send the ship " atlantic " to calcutta for supplies .
by 1792 the colony was well established .
the whaling industry was started , ships were visiting sydney to trade , and convicts whose sentences had expired were taking up farming .
john macarthur and other soldiers were importing sheep and beginning to grow wool .
the colony was still very short of skilled farmers , craftsmen and tradesmen , and the convicts continued to work as little as possible , even though they were working mainly to grow their own food .
in late 1792 , phillip gave up his governorship and sailed for england on the ship " atlantic " .
he also took bennelong and his friend yemmerrawanie , another young australian who would succumb to english weather and disease and not live to make the journey home .
the european population of new south wales at his departure was 4,221 .
the first years of the colony had been years of struggle and hardship , but the worst was over , and there were no more famines in new south wales .
he arrived in london in 1793 .
he gave up his formal resignation and was granted a pension of £00 a year .
phillip 's estranged wife , margaret , had died in 1792 and was buried in st beuno 's churchyard , llanycil , bala , merionethshire .
he married isabella whitehead in 1794 .
in 1796 he went back to sea .
in january 1799 he became a rear admiral .
in 1805 , when he was 67 , he retired from the navy with the rank of admiral of the blue , and spent most of his life in bath .
he continued to correspond with friends in new south wales and to promote the colony 's interests with government officials .
he died in 1814 .
his last will and testament have been transcribed and is online .
he is buried in st . nicholas ' church , bathampton .
the grave was discovered in 1897 and the premier of new south wales , sir henry parkes , had it restored .
an annual service of remembrance is held here around phillip 's birthdate by the british-australia society to commemorate his life .
in 2007 geoffrey robertson qc found that phillip 's remains are no longer in the church , bathampton and have been lost .
he is not where australians believe that he now lies .
a number of places in australia bear phillip 's name , including port phillip island quiver victoria island commissioners , phillip island ƒ , phillip island novyyyyyy , phillip street in sydney , the suburb of phillip in canberra , the governor phillip tower building in sydney , and many streets , including a state high school in sydney .
a monument to phillip in bath abbey church was built in 1937 .
the main parts of the monument were re-erected at watling street , near saint paul 's cathedral , in 1968 .
there is a different memorial in the church of st mary-le-bow .
there is a statue of him in the botanic gardens , sydney .
there is a portrait of him in the national portrait gallery , london .
michael pembroke wrote about his life as a highly skilled international spy .
as part of a series of events on the bicentenary of his death , a memorial was dedicated in westminster abbey on 9 july 2014 .
in the service the dean of westminster , very reverend dr john hall , described phillip as : " this modest , yet world-class seaman , linguist , and patriot , whose selfless service laid the foundations on which was developed the commonwealth of australia , will always be remembered and honoured alongside other pioneers and inventors here in the : david livingstone , thomas cochrane , and isaac newton . "
a similar memorial was unveiled by the outgoing governor of new south wales , marie bashir , in st james ' church , sydney on 31 august 2014 .
a bronze statue was put at the museum of sydney , and a full-day symposium planned on his contributions to the founding of modern australia .
phillip is a prominent character in timberlake wertenbaker 's play " our country 's good " .
he is shown as compassionate and just , but receives little support from his fellow officers .
he is also known in " banished " .
phillip is referred to in the john williamson song " chains around my ankle " .
phillip is a fictional character in the 2005 movie " the incredible journey of mary bryant " .
in 2008 , the novel " the lieutenant " was about phillip through the character commodore james gilbert .
phillip is a character in the 2015 series " banished ( tv series revolves around " .
