rock and rollouts are a type of popular music that originated in the united states during the late 1940s and early 1950s .
the genre began in the 1920s and 1940s , but it was not until 1954 .
according to greg kot , " rock and roll " refers to a style of popular music that was first made in the 1950s .
rock and roll may have contributed to the civil rights movement .
it went on to spawn various genres , often without the initial characteristic backbeat , that are now more commonly called simply " rock music " or " rock " .
the phrase " rocking and rolling " originally meant the movement of a ship on the ocean , but was used by the early 20th century .
various gospel , blues and swing recordings used the phrase before it became used more frequently .
by 1943 , the rock and roll inn in south merchantville , new jersey , was established as a music venue .
the origins of rock and roll have been debated by commentators and historians of music .
there is general agreement that it arose in the southern united states .
the migration of many former slaves and their descendants to major cities such as st . louis , memphis , new york city , detroit , detroit , chicago , cleveland , and buffalo caused the migration of african americans .
this helped this process of " cultural collision " .
one example of a jazz song with recognizably rock and roll elements is big joe turner with pianist pete johnson 's 1939 single " roll ' em pete " , which is regarded as an important precursor of rock and roll .
during and immediately after world war ii , jazz bands were less economical and tended to be replaced by smaller combos , using guitars , bass and drums .
in the same period , particularly on the west coast and in the midwest , the development of jump blues , with its guitar riffs , prominent beats and shouted lyrics , prefigured many later developments .
rock ' n ' roll " , keith richards , says that chuck berry developed his brand of rock and roll by transposing the familiar two-note lead line of jump blues piano directly to the electric guitar .
like the country boogie and chicago electric blues , the blues were influenced by many of the elements that would be seen as characteristic of rock and roll .
he made the electric guitar as its centerpiece .
soon after the change of the electric guitar , amplifier and microphone was made , and the 45 rpm record was 45 rpm .
they also had a similar rise of radio stations that played their music .
no single record can be identified as " the first " rock and roll record .
in terms of its wide cultural impact across society in the u . s . and elsewhere , bill haley 's " rock around the clock " , recorded in april 1954 but not a commercial success until the following year , is generally recognized as an important milestone .
rockabilly is a type of rock and roll music which was played and recorded in the mid-1950s .
elvis presley was influenced by many of the greatest african-american musicians like bb king , chuck berry , and fats domino .
his style of music combined with black influences created controversy during a turbulent time in history .
many other popular rock and roll singers of the time , such as fats domino and little richard , came out of the black rhythm and blues tradition , making the music attractive to white audiences , and are not usually classed as " rockabilly " .
it set the rock and roll boom in motion .
" rock around the clock " was the opening song to a global audience .
in 1956 , the arrival of rockabilly was underlined by the success of songs like " folsom prison blues " by johnny cash , " blue suede shoes " by perkins and the no .
later rockabilly acts , particularly performing songwriters like buddy holly , would be a major influence on british invasion acts and especially on the song writing of the beatles and through them on the nature of later rock music .
doo-wop was one of the most popular forms of 1950s rhythm and blues , often compared with rock and roll .
the beginnings of the musical were in african-american vocal groups of the 1930s and 40s .
after the 1940s r & b vocal acts such as the orioles , the ravens and the clovers , who injected a strong element of traditional gospel and , increasingly , the energy of jump blues .
by 1954 , as rock and roll was beginning to emerge , a number of similar acts began to cross over from the r & b charts to mainstream success , often with the crows , the penguins , the el dorados and the turbans all scoring major hits .
despite the subsequent explosion in records from doo wop acts in the later ' 50s , many did not chart or were one-hit wonders .
exceptions included the platters , with songs including " the great pretender " 6th earl " — 1955 — and the coasters with humorous songs like " yakety yak " — 1958 .
in the late 1960s , there were increasing numbers of white , particularly italian-american , singers taking up doo wop , creating all-white groups like the mystics and dion and the belmonts and racially integrated groups like the del-vikings and the impalas .
r & b music had been gaining a stronger beat and a wilder style .
before the efforts of freed and others , black music was taboo on many white-owned radio outlets , but artists and producers quickly recognized the potential of rock and roll .
some of presley 's early recordings were covers of black rhythm and blues songs , such as " that 's all right " .
many publishers , record executives , and even managers would insert their name as a composer in order to collect royalty checks .
covers were customary in the music industry at the time ; it was made particularly easy by the compulsory license provision of united states copyright law prohibitsppiness .
one of the first relevant hits was roy brown 's 1947 original jump blues hit " good rocking tonight " into a more showy rocker and the louis prima rocker " oh babe " in 1950 , as well as amos milburn 's cover of what may have been the first white rock and roll record , in 1949 .
pat boone recorded versions of songs recorded by the likes of fats domino , little richard , the flamingos and ivory joe hunter .
for example , bill haley 's version of " shake , rattle and roll " transformed big joe turner 's humorous and racy tale of adult love into an energetic teen dance number .
elvis ' rock and roll version of " hound dog " was very different from the blues shouter that big mama thornton had recorded four years earlier .
by 1959 , the deaths of buddy holly , the big bopper and ritchie valens in a plane crash happened on february 1959 .
marketing frequently emphasized the physical looks of the artist rather than the music .
some music historians have pointed to important developments that built on rock and roll in this period , including multitrack recording , developed by les paul , the electronic treatment of sound by such innovators as joe meek , and the " wall of sound " productions of phil spector , continued desegregation of the rise of surf rock and the twist of surf rock and the craze twist .
it shared a common language , had been exposed to american culture through the stationing of troops in the country .
the skiffle craze , led by lonnie donegan , made amateurish versions of american folk songs .
the first was in 1955 , and it reached the british charts in the united kingdom .
the british music industry was to try to produce copies of american records , recorded with session musicians and often fronted by teen idols .
other leading acts included billy fury , joe brown , and johnny kidd & the pirates .
about the same time , a british blues scene developed .
many groups moved towards the beat music of rock and roll and blues from skiffle , like the quarrymen who became the beatles , producing a form of rock and roll revivalism that carried them and many other groups to national success from about 1963 and to 1964 .
rock and roll may have contributed to the civil rights movement .
the lyrics of rock and roll songs were about conflicts that most listeners could relate to through personal experience .
topics such as sex that had generally been considered taboo began to appear in rock and roll lyrics .
rock and roll appeared at a time when racial tensions in the united states were entering a new phase , with the beginnings of the civil rights movement for desegregation .
the coming together of white youth audiences and black music in rock and roll caused strong white racist reactions in the us .
many people saw rock and roll as a way for desegregation , in creating a new form of music that encouraged racial cooperation and shared experience .
some people say that early rock and roll was important in the way both white and black teenagers identified themselves .
rock and roll was one of the first music genres to define an age group .
rock and roll is often seen with the emergence of teen culture among the first baby boomer generation .
in " there 's no romance in rock and roll " from " true life romance "ropolis 1956 c1 , a defiant teen dates a rock and roll-loving boy but drops him for one who likes traditional adult music .
in britain , the teddy boy movement became part of the early 20th century .
rock and roll has been seen as a reorienting popular music toward a youth market .
