emperor yu ryakuuuuuuuuuuuuu -lrb- [unk] [unk] 天 皇 , yu rykoku-tenno prefecture -rrb- was the 21st emperor of japan , according to the traditional order of succession .
he is remembered as a patron of sericulture .
no certain dates can be assigned to this emperor 's life or reign .
yu ryaku was a 5th-century monarch .
the reign of emperor kinmeisburg -lrb- 509 – 571 ad -rrb- was the first emperor to assign verifiable dates .
according to the " kojiki " , this emperor is said to have ruled from the thirteenth month of the eleventh month of 456 reeling heishin gibbons until his death on the seventh day of 479888 kibikinsey .
according to " kojiki " and " nihon shoki " , yu ryku was named prince ohatsuse wakataketteswarakettettettettettettettettettettettettette 武ored at birth .
yu ryaku is a name given to him by a much later period .
he was the fifth and youngest son of emperor ingyo .
after his elder brother anko was murdered , he won the struggle against his other brothers and became the new emperor .
yuryaku 's contemporary title would not have been " tenno " .
rather , it was presumably " sumeramikoto " or " amenoshita shiroshimesu okimi " 治 天 下 大 王 ¥ , meaning " the great king who rules all under heaven " .
he was also known as the " great king of yamato " .
he had three wives aboard .
his successor was prince shiraka ( emperor seineidilly .
in 463 , yu rykoku tenno invited the thunder god of the mimuro hill to come to the imperial palace .
he obliged , thinking the supernatural being would have no reason to refuse the invitation , and rode carrying a halberd with a red banner , symbolising his office of royal messenger .
the thunder stroke , and sugaru helped the priests to bring the kami into a portable carriage , to be brought in the emperor 's presence , as a great serpent .
but , he neglected to practice proper purification and religious abstinence .
the thunder kami then showed his displeasure through thundering and threatening fiery eyeballs , and emperor yuryaku fled into the interior of the palace while covering his eyes .
the great serpent was returned to mimuro , and the emperor made many offerings to appease the angry god .
this story is recorded in nihongi and mentioned by william george aston , in " shinto , the ancient religion of japan " .
yuryaku was of ungovernable and suspicious temperament , and committed many acts of arbitrary cruelty .
the actual place of yu ryaku 's grave is not known .
the emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial shinto shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine in habikino , osaka .
it is formally named " tajihi no takawashi-no-hara no misasagi " .
empress kusaka-no-hatabihime 香 [unk] [unk] 皇 女 女 子 , emperor nintoku 's daughter , kusaka-no-hatabihime .
consort : katsuragi no karahime buddha buddha buddha buddha buddha buddha , katsuragi no tsubura no tsubura no oomi 's daughter .
consort : kibi no wakahime buddha buddha buddha buddha buddha buddha buddha buddha , kibi no kamitsumichi no omi 's daughter kibi no -lrb- [unk] [unk] [unk] [unk] -rrb- , kibi no kamitsumichi no kamitsumichi no omi 's daughter .
consort : wani no ominagimi 女 [unk] 女 [unk] 女 [unk] 女 , kasuga no wani no omi fukame 's daughter is kami no ominagimi .
according to the book of song , a king bustered 武eux from japan dispatched envoys to emperor liu song , a minor chinese dynasty , in both 477 and 478 .
communications included a notice that the previous ruler had died , and that bu had ascended to the throne .
the king ' bu ' in this document is believed to refer to emperor yu rykoku .
the inscriptions on the inariyama and eta funayama sword , also supports the idea that bu is equivalent to emperor yuryaku .
he ruled the country until 502 .
the emperor is interested in poetry .
poems attributed to him are included in the " man ' yoshu " .
