no certain dates can be assigned to this emperor 's life or reign .
according to the " kojiki " , this emperor is said to have ruled from the thirteenth month of the eleventh month of 456 reeling heishin gibbons until his death on the seventh day of 479888 kibikinsey .
yu ryaku is a name given to him by a much later period .
after his elder brother anko was murdered , he won the struggle against his other brothers and became the new emperor .
yuryaku 's contemporary title would not have been " tenno " .
rather , it was presumably " sumeramikoto " or " amenoshita shiroshimesu okimi " 治 天 下 大 王 ¥ , meaning " the great king who rules all under heaven " .
in 463 , yu rykoku tenno invited the thunder god of the mimuro hill to come to the imperial palace .
he obliged , thinking the supernatural being would have no reason to refuse the invitation , and rode carrying a halberd with a red banner , symbolising his office of royal messenger .
the thunder stroke , and sugaru helped the priests to bring the kami into a portable carriage , to be brought in the emperor 's presence , as a great serpent .
the thunder kami then showed his displeasure through thundering and threatening fiery eyeballs , and emperor yuryaku fled into the interior of the palace while covering his eyes .
the great serpent was returned to mimuro , and the emperor made many offerings to appease the angry god .
yuryaku was of ungovernable and suspicious temperament , and committed many acts of arbitrary cruelty .
the actual place of yu ryaku 's grave is not known .
according to the book of song , a king bustered 武eux from japan dispatched envoys to emperor liu song , a minor chinese dynasty , in both 477 and 478 .
communications included a notice that the previous ruler had died , and that bu had ascended to the throne .
the king ' bu ' in this document is believed to refer to emperor yu rykoku .
the inscriptions on the inariyama and eta funayama sword , also supports the idea that bu is equivalent to emperor yuryaku .
he ruled the country until 502 .
the emperor is interested in poetry .
poems attributed to him are included in the " man ' yoshu " .