israel and judah were kingdoms of the iron age in the ancient levant .
israel became an important local power by the 10th century bce before falling to the assyrian empire in 722 bc .
israel 's southern neighbor , the kingdom of judah , became a client state of the neo-assyrian empire and then the neo-babylonian empire before a revolt against the latter led to its destruction in 586 bce .
after the fall of babylon to the achaemenid empire under cyrus the great in 539 bce , some judean exiles returned to jerusalem .
in the 2nd century bce the judaeans revolted against the seleucid empire and created the hasmonean kingdom .
this was the last kingdom of israel , which was conquered by pompey of rome .
after the client kingdoms under herodian , judea was wracked by civil disturbances .
the name judeaailing ceased to be used by greco-romans after the bar kochba revolt of 135 ad .
the eastern mediterranean seaboard the levant is 400 miles north to south from the taurus mountains to the sinai peninsula , and 70 to 100 miles east to west between the sea and the arabian desert .
the coastal plain of the southern levant is in the foothills .
east of the plain and the shfela is a mountainous ridge , the " hill country of judah " in the south , the " hill country of ephraim " north of that , then galilee and mount lebanon .
to the east again lie the steep-sided valley occupied by the jordan river , the dead sea , and the wadi of the arabah , which goes down to the eastern arm of the red sea .
beyond the plateau is the syrian desert .
to the southwest is egypt , to the northeast mesopotamia .
the location of the narrow levant made the area a battleground between the powerful entities that surrounded it .
canaan in the late bronze age was a shadow of what it had been centuries ago : many cities were abandoned , others shrank in size , and the total settled population was probably not much more than a hundred thousand .
letters from the egyptian archives indicate that jerusalem was already a canaanite city-state recognising egyptian overlordship .
it was dominated by egypt , each city under its own ruler , constantly at odds with its neighbours , and appealing to the egyptians to adjudicate their differences .
the canaanite city state system broke down during the late bronze age collapse .
the process was gradual and a strong egyptian presence continued into the 12th century bce , and , while some canaanite cities were destroyed , others continued to exist in iron age i .
the name " israel " first appears in the merneptah stele circa 1209 bce : " israel is laid waste and his seed is no more . "
archaeologist paula mcnutt says : " it is probably . . . during iron age i that a population began to identify itself as ' israelite ' , ' on religion and prohibitions .
in the late bronze age there were no more than about 25 villages in the highlands , but this increased to over 300 by the end of iron age i .
the villages were more numerous and larger in the north .
archaeologists and historians try to trace the origins of these villagers have found it impossible to identify any distinctive features that could define them as specifically israelite collared-rim jars and four-room houses have been identified outside the highlands .
israel finkelstein proposed that the oval or circular layout that distinguishes some of the earliest highland sites , and the notable absence of pig bones from hill sites , could be taken as markers of ethnicity , but others have cautioned that these can be a " common-sense " adaptation to highland life and not revelatory origins of origins .
other aramaean sites also show that there is no pig remains at that time .
in " the bible unearthed " , finkelstein and silberman summarised recent studies .
they described how , up until 1967 , the land in the highlands of western palestine was virtually an archaeological " terra incognita " .
since then , intensive surveys have examined the traditional territories of the tribes of judah , ben , ephraim , and manasseh .
these surveys have shown the sudden emergence of a new culture in the land of israel earlier during iron age i .
this new culture is characterised by a lack of pork remains ; whereas pork formed 20 % of the philistine diet in places nostrils .
the israelite ethnic identity had originated , not from the exodus and a later conquest , but from a change of the canaanite-philistine cultures .
modern scholars therefore see israel arising peacefully and internally from existing people in the highlands of canaan .
unusually favorable climatic conditions in the first two centuries of iron age ii brought about a population , settlements and trade throughout the region .
in the central highlands this unification in a kingdom with the city of samaria as its capital , possibly by the second half of the 10th century bc .
israel had clearly emerged by the middle of the 9th century bce , when the assyrian king shalmaneser iii names ahab the israelite among his enemies at the battle of qarqar .
at this time israel was engaged in a three-way contest with damascus and tyre for control of the jezreel valley and galilee in the north , and with moab , ammon and aram damascus in the east for control of gilead ; the mesha stelepool , left by a king of the molb , throwing off the house of omab , " .
it is the earliest extra-biblical reference to the name " yahweh " .
a century later israel came into increasing conflict with the expanding neo-assyrian empire .
both the bible and assyrian sources say that many people from israel and their replacement with settlers from other parts of the empire such as the assyrian empire were an established part of assyrian imperial policy , a means of breaking the old power structure and never again became an independent political entity .
judah emerged somewhat later than israel , probably during the 9th century bce , but the subject is considerable controversy .
there are indications that during the 10th and 9th centuries bce , the southern highlands had been divided between a number of centres , none with clear primacy .
during the reign of hezekiah , between 715 and 686 bc , a notable increase in the power of the judean state can be observed .
the siloam inscription , a lintel-like stone inscription , is found over the doorway of a tomb .
they were used throughout sennacherib 's 29-year reign , along with bullae from sealed documents .
in the 7th century jerusalem grew to have a population many times greater than earlier .
this was probably the result of a cooperative arrangement with the assyrians to establish judah as an assyrian vassal state controlling the valuable olive industry .
judah prospered as a vassal state , despite a disastrous rebellion against sennacheriboitius , but in the last half of the 7th century bce , assyria suddenly collapsed , and the ensuing competition between egypt and the neo-babylonian empire for control of judah .
babylonian judah suffered a steep decline in both economy and population .
jerusalem , while probably not totally abandoned , was much smaller than previously .
the philistine city of ashkalon was conquered in 604 .
the temple at bethel in benjamin replaced that at jerusalem .
the babylonian conquest was a major victory in the conquest of jerusalem .
the most significant casualty was the state ideology of zion theology , the idea that the god of israel had chosen jerusalem for his dwelling-place and that the davidic dynasty would reign there forever .
the fall of the city and the end of davidic kingship forced the leaders of the exile community kings , priests , scribes and prophets to reformulate the concepts of community , faith and politics .
the exile community in babylon became the source of significant portions of the hebrew bible : isaiah 40 – 55 ; ezekiel ; the final version of jeremiah ; the work of the hypothesized priestly source in the pentateuch ; and the final form of the history of israel from deuteronomy to 2 kings .
theologically , the babylonian exiles were responsible for the doctrines of individual responsibility and universalism .
the trauma of the exile experience led to the development of a strong sense of hebrew identity distinct from other peoples .
life after the fall of jerusalem probably went on much as it had before .
it may even have improved , as they were rewarded with the land and property of the deportees , much to the anger of the community of exiles remaining in babylon .
the assassination around 582 of the babylonian governor by a disaffected member of the former royal house of david provoked a babylonian crackdown .
nevertheless , those unwalled cities and towns that remained were subject to slave raids by the phoenicians and intervention in their internal affairs by samaritans , arabs , and ammonites .
when babylon fell to the persian cyrus the great in 539 bce , judah judah judah judah judah judah judah judah seemed to be an administrative division in the persian empire .
cyrus was succeeded as king by cambyses , who added egypt to the empire .
his death in 522 was followed by a period of anarchy until darius the great seized the throne in about 521 .
darius introduced a reform of the administrative arrangements of the empire .
after 404 the persians lost control of egypt , which became persia 's main rival outside europe .
soon after persia fell to alexander the great , bringing in the hellenistic period in the levant .
yehud 's population over the entire period was probably never more than about 30,000 and that of jerusalem no more than about 1,500 , most of them connected in some way to the temple .
according to the bible , one of the first acts of cyrus , the persian conqueror of babylon , was to commission jewish exiles to return to jerusalem and rebuild their temple .
it was probably not until the middle of the next century , at the earliest , that jerusalem became the capital of judah .
the persians may have experimented initially with ruling yehud as a davidic client-kingdom under descendants of jehoiachin , but by the mid-5th century bce yehud had become a theocracy , ruled by hereditary high priests , with a persian-appointed governor , frequently charged with keeping order and seeing that were paid .
ezra and nehemiah arrived in jerusalem in the middle of the 5th century bce .
the returnees rebuffing the attempt of the " peoples of the land " to participate in the rebuilding of the temple .
during the 5th century bce , ezra and nehemiah attempted to re-integrate these rival factions into a united and ritually pure society .
between 538 and 400 bc , the persian era laid the foundations for the unified judaic religion and the beginning of a scriptural canon .
other important landmarks in this period include the replacement of hebrew as the everyday language of judah by aramaicttered although hebrew continued to be used for religious and literary purposes ; and darius 's reform of the empire 's bureaucracy , which may have led to extensive revisions and reorganizations of the jewish torah .
the israel of the persian period was a group of people who lived in the old kingdom of judah , returnees from the babylonian exile community , mesopotamians who had joined them or had been exiled themselves to samaria at a far earlier period , samaritans , and others .
the beginning of the hellenistic period is marked by the conquest of alexander the greatcolor 333 bc onwards .
when alexander died in 323 , his son alexander took over his place as ruler of his empire .
ptolemy i asserted himself as the ruler of egypt in 322 .
at first , relations between seleucids and jews were cordial , but the attempt of antiochus iv epiphanes arose 174 – 1636 .
some modern commentators see this period as a civil war between orthodox and hellenized jews .
the kings of the bible tried to revive the judah described in the bible : a jewish monarchy ruled from jerusalem and including all territories once ruled by david and solomon .
in order to carry out this project , the hasmoneans made one-time moabites , edomites , and ammonites to judaism , as well as the lost kingdom of israel .
some scholars think that the hasmonean dynasty made the final jewish canon .
in 331 bce , ptolemy took over the city of alexandria .
he also took control of yehud medinata in 320 .
however , there were others who also had their eyes on that area .
another former general , antigonus monophthalmus , had driven out the satrap of babylon , seleucus , in 317 and continued on towards the levant .
seleucus found refuge with ptolemy .
demetrius was defeated at the battle of gaza and ptolemy regained control of yehud medinata .
however , not soon after this antigonus came back and ptolemy forced ptolemy to retreat back to egypt .
seleucus defeated antigonus in 301 bc .
seleucus was given the areas of syria and palestine , but ptolemy would not give up those lands , causing the syrian wars between the ptolemies and seleucids .
not much is known about the happenings of those in yehud medinata from the time of alexander 's death until the battle of ipsus .
at first , the jews were content with ptolemy 's rule over them .
his reign brought peace and economic stability .
he also allowed them to keep their religious practices , so long as they paid their taxes and didn ’ t rebel .
ptolemy i came ptolemy ii philadelphus , who was able to keep the territory of yehud medinata and brought the dynasty to the peak of its power .
he was victorious in both the first and second syrian wars , but after trying to end the conflict with the seleucids by arranging a marriage between his daughter berenice and the seleucid king antiochus ii , he died .
the arranged marriage did not work .
this was one of the reasons for the third syrian war .
before all of this , ptolemy ii fought and defeated the nabataean .
in order to enforce his hold on them , he reinforced many cities in palestine and built new ones .
as a result of this , more greeks and macedonians moved to those new cities and brought over their customs and culture , or hellenism .
the ptolemaic rule also gave rise to ' tax farmers ' .
these were the bigger farmers who collected the high taxes of the smaller farmers .
the farmers made a lot of money off of this , but it also put a rift between the aristocracy and everyone else .
during the end of the third syrian war , the high priest onias ii would not pay the tax to the ptolemy iii euergetes .
it is thought that this shows a turning point in the jew 's support of the ptolemies .
the fourth and fifth syrian wars marked the end of the ptolemaic control of palestine .
both of these wars hurt palestine more than the previous three .
the unified rulers of the region were ptolemy iv philopater and ptolemy v .
the seleucid rule of palestine began in 198 bc under antiochus iii .
he , like the ptolemies , let the jews keep their religion and customs and even went so far as to encourage rebuilding of the temple and city after they welcomed him so warmly into jerusalem .
antiochus owed the romans a great deal of money .
to raise money , he decided to rob a temple .
the people at the temple of bel in elam were not pleased , so they killed antiochus and everyone helping him in 187 bc .
he was succeeded by his son seleucus iv .
he was murdered by his minister in 175 .
his brother antiochus iv epiphanes took his place .
heliodorus had tried to steal the treasures of the temple in jerusalem .
he was informed of this by a rival of the current high priest onias iii .
heliodorus was not allowed into the temple , but it required onias to go explain to the king why one of his ministers was denied access somewhere .
his rivals put up a new high priest .
onias ' brother jason hovered a hellenized version of joshuarford took his place .
now with jason as high priest and antiochus iv as king , many jews adopted hellenistic ways .
some of these ways were the building of a gymnasium , finding ways to hide their circumcision , and just generally not abiding by the holy covenant .
this leads to the beginning of the maccabean revolt .
many jews were not happy with the way hellenism spread into judea .
some of these jews were mattathias and his sons .
mattathias refused to offer sacrifice .
he killed a jew who was going to do so as well as the king 's representative .
because of this , mattathias and his sons had to flee .
this is the true beginning of the maccabean revolt .
judas maccabeus was the leader of the rebels .
he proved to be a successful general , defeating an army lead by apollonius .
they started to catch the attention of king antiochus iv in 165 , who told his chancellor to put and end to the revolt .
the chancellor , lysias , sent three generals to do just that , but they were all defeated by the maccabees .
soon after lysias went himself but according to 1 and 2 maccabees he is defeated .
there is evidence that it was not that simple and that there was negotiation , but lysias still left .
antiochus v gave the jews religious freedom .
lysias claimed to be his regent .
around this time was the dedication of the temple .
during the siege of the acra , one of judas 's brothers , eleazor , was killed .
the maccabees had to go back to jerusalem .
however , lysias had to pull out because of a contradiction of who was to be regent for antiochus v . shortly after , both were killed by demetrius i soter who became the new king .
the new high priest , alcimus , had come to jerusalem with the company of an army led by bacchides .
a group of scribes called the hasideans asked him for his word that he would not harm anyone .
he agreed , but killed sixty of them .
judas is able to make a treaty with the romans .
after this , judas is killed in jerusalem .
his brother jonathan succeeds him .
for eight years , jonathan doesn ’ t do much .
in 153 , the seleucid empire started to suffer from problems .
he could take back jerusalem .
he was appointed high priest by alexander balas .
when the seleucids arose , jonathan occupied the acra .
as conflicts over the throne arose , he took control of the acra .
but in 142 he was killed .
his brother simon took over as king .
simon was nominated for the title of high priest , general , and leader by a " great assembly " .
he reached out to rome to have them guarantee that judea would be an independent land .
antiochus vii wanted the cities of gadara , joppa , and the acra back .
he also wanted a very large tribute .
simon only wanted to pay a fraction of that for only two of the cites , so antiochus sent his general cendebaeus to attack .
the general was killed .
simon and two of his sons were killed in a plot to overthrow the hasmoneans .
his last remaining son , john hyrcanus , was supposed to be killed .
hyrcanus had many problems to deal with as the new high priest .
antiochus invaded judea and besieged jerusalem in 134 bc .
because of lack of food , hyrcanus had to make a deal with antiochus .
he had to pay a large amount of money , tear down the walls of the city , say seleucid power over judea , and help the seleucids fight against the parthians .
hyrcanus agreed to this , but the war against the parthians did not work .
hyrcanus was able to take back judea and keep his power .
this was because of the large number of jews living there .
aristobulus i was the first hasmonean priest-king .
he defied his father 's wishes that his mother should take over the government and instead had her and all of his brothers except for one thrown in prison .
the one not thrown in prison was later killed .
the most important thing he did during his one-year-reign was conquer most of ituraea .
after his death , he was succeeded by his brother alexander jannaeus .
he also married his brother 's widow , showing little respect for jewish law .
his first conquest was ptolemais .
the people called to ptolemy ix for aid , as he was in cyprus .
his mother , cleopatra iii , came to help her son .
alexander was not a popular ruler .
this was a civil war in jerusalem .
after alexander janaeaus ' death , his widow became ruler , but not high priest .
the end of the hasmonean dynasty was in 63 when the romans came at the request of the current priest-king aristobulus ii and his competitor hyrcanus ii .
judea became a client-kingdom of rome .
herod was crowned king of judah by the romans .
with their help , herod had seized jerusalem by 37 .
in 40-39 bce herod the great was appointed king of the jews by the roman senate .
henotheism is defined in the dictionary as adherence to one god out of several .
many scholars believe that before monotheism in ancient israel came a transitional period in between polytheism and monotheism .
in this period many followers of the israelite religion worshiped the god yahweh .
some scholars think this henotheistic period is related to mesopotamia .
there are arguments that mesopotamia shared the concept of the cult of ashur with israel .
ashur was the supreme god of all the others .
this idea is believed to have influenced the transitional period in which many people were henotheists .
israelite religion is a religion that was formed with influence from mesopotamian religious traditions .
canaanite religion as a base was natural .
canaanite religion was a polytheistic religion .
most scholars agree that the israelite god of yahweh was adopted from the canaanite god el .
el was the creation god .
during the intermediate stages most people are believed to have been henotheistic .
before the emergence of yahweh as the patron god of the region of ancient israel and judah not all worshiped him alone , or even at all .
during this time , many families worshiped different gods .
religion was very much centered around the family , as opposed to the community .
people in israel and judah lived there during the time of moses .
many different areas worshiped different gods , due to social isolation .
later , people started to worship yahweh alone and fully convert to monotheistic values .
it can be read about further in the iron age yahwism section below .
evidence from the bible suggests that henotheism did exist : " they the hebrews went and served alien gods and paid homage to them , gods of whom they had no experience and whom he yahweh did not allot to them . "
many believe that this quote goes to show that the early israelite kingdom followed similar traditions as ancient mesopotamia , where each major urban center had a supreme god .
each culture embraced their patron god , but did not deny the existence of other cultures ' patron gods .
in ancient israel , the patron god was ashur .
some scholars have used the bible as evidence to argue that most of the people alive during the old testament were most likely henotheists .
there are many quotes from the old testament .
one quote from jewish and christian tradition that supports this claim is the first commandment .
you shall have no other gods before me . "
this quote states that jews and christians should consider yahweh or god the supreme god , incomparable to other supernatural beings .
some scholars think angels and demons are the same as the tradition of henotheism .
instead of getting rid of the concept of other supernatural beings , these religions changed their religion into angels and demons .
yahweh became the supreme god of angels , demons and humans , with angels and demons considered more powerful than the average human .
this tradition of believing in multiple forms of supernatural beings is attributed by many to the traditions of ancient mesopotamia and canaan and their pantheons of gods .
they have since left lasting impacts on some of the biggest and most widespread religions in our world today .
like the ancient canaanite religion from which it evolved and other religions of the ancient near east , was based on a cult of ancestors and worship of family gods aboard the gods of the gods .
with the emergence of the monarchy at the beginning of iron age ii the kings promoted their family god , yahweh , as the god of the kingdom , but beyond the royal court , religion continued to be both polytheistic and family-centered .
the major deities were el , asherah , and yahweh , with baal as a fourth god , and perhaps shamashashucible the sun extending in the early period .
she continued to be popular at a community level until persian times .
yahweh , the national god of both israel and judah , seems to have originated in edom and midian in southern canaan .
scholars believe that the first formative event in the emergence of the distinctive religion described in the bible was triggered by assyria in 722 bc .
refugees from the northern kingdom fled to judah , bringing with them laws and a prophetic tradition of yahweh .
this religion was subsequently adopted by the landowners of judah , who in 640 bce placed the eight-year-old josiah on the throne .
judah at this time was a vassal state of assyria , but assyrian power collapsed in the 630s .
according to the deuteronomists , the treaty with yahweh would enable israel 's god to preserve both the city and the king in return for the people 's worship and obedience .
the destruction of jerusalem , its temple , and the davidic dynasty by babylon in 587 / 586 bce was deeply traumatic and led to revisions of the national mythos during the babylonian exile .
this revision was written in the deuteronomistic history , the books of joshua .
judges , samuel and kings interpreted the babylonian destruction as divinely-ordained punishment for the failure of israel 's kings to worship yahweh to the exclusion of all other deities .
the second temple period was 520 bce .
strict monotheism emerged among the priests of the temple establishment during the seventh and sixth centuries bce , as did beliefs regarding angels and demons .
most of the biblical literature , including the torah , was written or substantially revised during this time .
