an allegory is a metaphor in which a character , place or event is used to deliver a broader message about real-world issues and occurrences .
allegoryously in the sense of the practice and use of allegorical devices and works ulysses has occurred widely throughout history in all forms of art .
writers or speakers typically use allegories as literary devices or as rhetorical devices that conveysible semi -chment hidden or complex meanings through symbolic figures , actions , imagery , or events .
many allegories use personifications of abstract concepts .
the word " allegory " comes from latin " allegoria " , the latinisation of the greek " allegoria " .
frye discussed what he called a " continuum of allegory " .
the characters in a " naive " allegory are not fully three-dimensional .
the origins of allegory can be traced back to homer in his " quasi-allegorical " use of personifications of , e . g . , terrorstered deimoseux and fearific phobosbilities at il .
the title is usually awarded to whoever was the earliest to put out allegorical interpretations of homer .
this leads to two possible answers : theagenes of rhegiumference , which porphyry calls the " first allegorist , porph .
or pherecydes of syros , both of whom are thought to be active in the 6th century bc .
the debate is complex , since it demands we observe the distinction between two often conflated uses of the greek verb " allegorein " , which can mean both " to speak allegorically " and " to interpret allegorically . "
in the case of " interpreting allegorically , " theagenes appears to be our earliest example .
presumably in response to proto-philosophical moral critiques of homernius e . g . xenophanes fr .
theagenes proposed symbolic interpretations .
hephestus represents fire , for instance instance hasty firing of the fr .
a2 in diels-kranz nadu
some scholars argue that pherecydes cosmogonic writings anticipated theagenes allegorical work , illustrated especially by his early placement of time wessex chronos ¥ in his genealogy of the gods , which is thought to be a reinterpretation of the titan kronos , from more traditional genealogies .
the best-known allegories are the cave in plato 's " republic " skopje book viilston .
plato 's best-known example of allegory is plato 's allegory of the cave .
plato describes a group of people who have lived chained in a cave all of their lives facing a blank wall .
the people watch shadows projected on the wall by things passing in front of a fire behind them .
the shadows are as close as the prisoners get to viewing reality .
he tries to tell the people in the cave of his discovery .
this allegory is , on a basic level , about a philosopher who upon finding greater knowledge outside the cave of human understanding .
in late antiquity , martianus capella organized all the information a fifth-century upper-class male needed to know into an allegory of the wedding of mercury and " philologia " with the seven liberal arts the young man needed to know as guests .
other early versions of the story are found in the hebrew bible , such as the extended metaphor in psalm 80 of the vine and its impressive spread and growth , representing israel 's conquest and peopling of the promised land .
ezekiel 16 and 17 is where the capture of that same vine by the mighty eagle represents israel 's exile to babylon .
the bible was a common early christian practice .
for example , the recently re-discovered commentary on the gospels by fortunatianus of aquileia has a comment by its english translator .
allegory has an ability to freeze the temporality of a story , while infusing it with a spiritual context .
mediaeval thinking accepted allegory as having a " reality " underlying any rhetorical or fictional uses .
the allegory was as true as the facts of surface appearances .
the papal bull " unam sanctam " is a book about the unity of christendom with the pope as its head .
this text also demonstrates the frequent use of allegory in religious texts during the mediaeval period , following the tradition and example of the bible .
in the late 15th century , the enigmatic " hypnerotomachia " , with its elaborate woodcut illustrations , shows the influence of themed pageants and masques on contemporary allegorical representation , as humanist dialectic conveyed them .
the denial of medieval allegory as found in the 12th century works of hugh of st victor and edward topsell 's " historie of foure-footed beastes " — london , 1607,1653 1653 rankin and its replacement in the study of nature with methods of categorisation and mathematics by naturalist john ray and the early modern science of the early modern science is thought to the beginnings of the early modern science .
meaningful stories are almost always used in larger issues .
this is the act of reading a story as an allegory .
examples of allegory in popular culture that may or may not have been intended include the works of bertolt brecht , and even some works of science fiction and fantasy , such as " the chronicles of narnia " by c . s . lewis and " a kingdom far and clear : the complete swan lake trilogy " by markrin .
the story of the apple falling onto isaac newton 's head is another famous allegory .
it simplified the idea of gravity by showing a simple way it was supposedly discovered .
it also made the scientific revelation well known by condensing the theory into a short story .
it is important to note that while allegoresis may make discovery of allegory in any work , not every work of modern fiction is allegorical .
according to henry littlefield , l . frank baum 's " the wonderful wizard of oz " may be readily understood as a plot-driven fantasy story in an extended fable with talking animals and broadly sketched characters , intended to discuss the politics of the time .
george macdonald emphasised in 1893 that " a fairy tale is not an allegory . "
j . r . r . tolkien 's " the lord of the rings " is another example of a well-known work mistakenly perceived as allegorical , as the author himself said , " . . i cordially dislike allegory in all its manifestations , and always have done so since i grew old and wary enough to detect its presence .
i much prefer history – true or feigned .
i think that many confuse with allegory , but the one lives in the freedom of the reader , and the other in the purposed domination of the author . "
tolkien hated the idea that the book 's one ring , which gives overwhelming power to those possessing it , was meant to be a nuclear weapon .
he also said that , had that the book would not have ended with the ring being destroyed , but rather with arms race .
then tolkien went on to outline an alternate story for " lord of the rings " .
tolkien 's works may not be treated as having allegorical themes .
this further reinforces the idea of forced allegoresis , as allegory is often a matter of interpretation and only sometimes of original artistic intention .
like allegorical stories , allegorical poetry has a meaning : a literal meaning and a symbolic meaning .
