the great rift valley is a series of contiguous geographic trenches .
while the name continues in some usages , it is rarely used in geology .
today , the term is most often used to refer to the valley of the east african rift .
geologists generally refer to these incipient plates as the nubian plate and the somali plate .
today these rifts and faults are seen as distinct , although connected , but originally , the great rift valley was thought to be a single feature that extended from lebanon in the north to mozambique in the south .
it includes what today is called the lebanese section of the dead sea transform , the jordan rift valley , red sea rift and the east african rift .
these rifts and faults were formed 35 million years ago .
the northernmost part of the rift is the central section of what is today the dead sea transform liszts or rift .
it separates the lebanon from the anti-lebanon mountains .
further south it is known as the hula valley separating the galilee mountains and the golan heights .
the jordan river begins here .
the rift then continues south through the jordan rift valley into the dead sea on the israeli-jordanian border .
from the dead sea southwards , the rift is occupied by the wadi arabah , then the gulf of aqaba , and then the red sea .
off sinai in the red sea , the sea becomes the red sea rift .
the red sea rift comes ashore to meet the east african rift and the aden ridge in the afar depression of east africa .
the junction of these three rifts is called the afar triple junction .
the rift valley is divided into two branches : the western rift valley and the eastern rift valley .
the western rift is bordered by some of the highest mountains in africa .
it contains the rift valley lakes , which include some of the deepest lakes in the world extending up to 1470 m deep at lake tanganyikakulam .
much of this area lies within the boundaries of national parks such as virunga national park in the democratic republic of congo , rwenzori national park and queen elizabeth national park in uganda , and volcanoes national park in rwanda .
it is between the two branches .
all of the african great lakes were formed as the result of the rift .
in kenya , the valley is deepest to the north of nairobi .
they have a high mineral content as the evaporation of water leaves the salts behind .
for example , lake magadi has high concentrations of sodality sodium carbonate ashore and lake elmenteita , lake bogoria , and lake nakuru are all strongly alkaline .
the southern section of the rift valley includes lake malawi , the third deepest freshwater body in the world , reaching 706 m in depth and separating the nyassa plateau of northern mozambique from malawi .
