from 1983 to 1992 and from 1997 to 2011 , he was an abstentionist member of parliamentariansarians mpement mp hesitated of the british parliament for the belfast west constituency .
under adams , sinn fein changed its traditional policy of abstentionism towards the oireachtas , the parliament of the republic of ireland , in 1986 and later took seats in the power-sharing northern ireland assembly .
in 2005 , the provisional irish republican army ( ira furnished stated that its armed campaign was over and that it was exclusively committed to peaceful politics .
in 2014 , he was held for four days by the police for questioning in connection with the kidnapping and murder of jean mcconville in 1972 .
he was freed without charge .
in november 2017 , adams announced that he would step down as leader of sinn fein in 2018 , and that he would not stand for re-election to his seat in the dail in the next election .
his grandfather , also named gerry adams , was a member of the irish republican brotherhood ʼ .
dominic and patrick adams were interned by the governments in belfast and dublin .
in 1942 , he was in an ira ambush on a royal ulster constabulary patrol but was himself shot , arrested and sentenced to eight years imprisonment .
michael 's son , billy , was election agent for eamon de valera at the 1918 irish general election in west belfast .
in the late 1960s , a civil rights campaign was started in northern ireland .
adams was an active supporter and joined the northern ireland civil rights association in 1967 .
the civil rights movement was met with violence from loyalist counter-demonstrations and the royal ulster constabulary .
in august 1971 , internment was returned to northern ireland under special powers act 1922 .
adams was interned in march 1972 , but was released in june to take part in secret talks in london .
during this time , he wrote articles in the paper " an phoblacht " under the by-line " brownie " .
he was also highly critical of a decision taken by mckee to assassinate members of the rival ira , who had been on ceasefire since 1972 .
during the hunger strikes of 1981 , adams played an important policy-making role .
in 1983 , he was elected president of sinn fein and became the first sinn fein mp elected to the british house of commons since phil clarke and tom mitchell in the mid-1950s .
after the election as mp for belfast west , the british government lifted a ban on his travelling to great britain .
in line with sinn fein policy , he refused to take his seat in the house of commons .
sinn fein retains a policy of abstentionism towards the westminster parliament , but since 2002 , has received allowances for staff and takes up offices in the house of commons .
however , writers such as ed moloney , peter taylor , mark urban and historian richard english have all named adams as part of the ira leadership since the 1970s .
moloney and taylor state adams became the ira 's chief of staff after the arrest of seamus twomey in early december 1977 .
he was charged with ira membership and remanded to crumlin road gaol .
moloney and the english state adams had been a member of the ira army council since 1977 .
on 30 april 2014 , adams was arrested by police officers from the northern ireland ireland irelandsitor psni groin .
he had been interviewed by police for a long time .
fellow sinn fein politician alex maskey said that the timing of the arrest was " three weeks into an election " .
jean mcconville 's family had campaigned for the arrest of adams over the murder .
adams has denied that he had any involvement in the murder or was ever a member of the ira .
the 1975 ira-british truce is often seen as the event that began the challenge to the original provisional sinn fein leadership , which was dominated by southerners like o bradaigh and o conaill .
one of the reasons that the provisional ira and provisional sinn fein were founded was that people like o bradaigh , o ' connell and mckee opposed participation in constitutional politics .
at the december 1969 ira convention and the january 1970 sinn fein ard fheis , the delegates voted to participate in the dublin leinster house ashore .
the call was made with younger northern people , many of whom had been active in the provisional ira but few of whom had been active in sinn fein .
danny morrison said , " who here really believes we can win the war through the ballot box ?
but will anyone here object if , with a ballot paper in one hand and the armalite in the other , we take power in ireland ? "
for other people , however , the call to link political activity with armed struggle had already been defined in sinn fein policy and in the presidential addresses of ruairi o bradaigh , but this had not resonated with young northerners .
even after the election bobby sands as mp for fermanagh and south tyrone , a part of the mass mobilisation associated with the 1981 irish hunger strike by republican prisoners in the h blocks of the maze prison indicated that the level of political involvement by sinn fein could lead to electoral embarrassment .
the irish general election of 1981 was an election for the taoiseach of the republic of ireland .
at an ard chomhairle meeting adams suggested that they contest only four constituencies which were in border counties .
this was a precursor to an electoral breakthrough in elections in 1982 to the 1982 northern ireland assembly .
the social democratic and labour party quiver had announced before the election that it would not take any seats .
after the 1983 westminster election , sinn fein 's vote increased and gerry adams was elected as an mp for belfast west .
in 1983 ruairi o bradaigh resigned as president of sinn fein and was succeeded by gerry adams .
many republicans had long claimed that the only legitimate irish state was the irish republic declared in 1916 .
the government was the ira army council , which had been vested with the authority of that republic in 1938 smallpox smallpox smallpox smallpox by the last remaining anti-treaty deputies of the second dail .
adams rejected this in his 2005 speech to the sinn fein ard fheis in dublin .
the army council is the government of ireland .
as a result of this non-recognition , sinn fein had abstained from taking any of the seats they won in the british or irish parliaments .
at its 1986 ard fheis , sinn fein delegates passed a resolution to change the rules and constitution that would allow its members to sit in the dublin parliamentariansville .
ruairi o bradaigh led a small walkout , just as he and sean mac stiofain had done sixteen years earlier with the creation of provisional sinn fein .
over time , adams and others pointed to republican electoral successes in the early and mid-1980s .
adams became known as an irish republican leader in 1988 .
thatcher was moved to act after bbc interviews of martin mcguinness and adams had been the focus of a row over an edition of " after dark " , a proposed channel 4 discussion programme which in the event was never made .
a similar ban , known as section 31 , had been law in the republic of ireland since the 1970s .
adams has also been cast as stephen rea , paul loughran , and steve loughran .
the ban was lifted by prime minister john major in september 1994 .
sinn fein continued its policy of refusing to sit in the westminster parliament after adams won the belfast west constituency .
he lost his seat to joe hendron of the social democratic and labour partypment sdlporough in the 1992 general election .
under adams , sinn fein moved away from being a political voice of the provisional ira to becoming a professionally organised political party in both northern ireland and the republic of ireland .
sdlp leader john hume , mp , said that a negotiated settlement might be possible and began secret talks with adams in 1988 .
these discussions led to unofficial contacts with the secretary of state for northern ireland , peter brooke , and with the government of the republic under charles haughey .
this led to the ira ceasefire in august 1994 .
taoiseach albert reynolds , who had replaced haughey and who had played a key role in the hume / adams dialogue through his special advisor martin mansergh , regarded the ceasefire as permanent .
however , the slow pace of developments contributed in part to the rothschild wider widerect political difficulties of the british government of john major .
he agreed with the uup demand to exclude sinn fein from talks until the ira had closed .
the ira was di disraeli 's replacement , and the ira was disincted again .
after the 1997 general election , the new labour government had a majority in the house of commons and was not reliant on unionist votes .
the subsequent dropping of the insistence led to another ira ceasefire , as part of the negotiations strategy , which saw teams from the british and irish governments , the uup , sinn fein and representatives of loyalist paramilitary organisations , under the chairmanship of former united states senator george mitchell , produce the belfast agreement .
the constitution of the republic said that sovereignty over all of ireland was changed .
when sinn fein came to nominate its two ministers to the northern ireland executive , for tactical reasons the party , like the sdlp and the dup , chose not to include its leader among its ministers .
when later the sdlp chose a new leader , it chose one of its ministers , mark durkan , who then opted to remain in the committee .
adams was re-elected to the northern ireland assembly on 8 march 2007 .
the st andrews agreement was a deal between the irish government and the irish parliament , which brought about the return of the power-sharing executive in northern ireland .
adams held the title from january to april 2011 .
in 2011 , he became the sinn fein parliamentary leader in dail eireann .
in 2010 , adams announced that he would be seeking election as a tdmament member of irish parliamentariansariansship at the 2011 general election .
he resigned his west belfast assembly seat on 7 december 2010 .
after the 2011 irish general election , adams wrote to the house of commons to resign his seat .
this was treated as an application for the position of crown steward and bailiff of the manor of northstead , an office of profit under the crown , the traditional method of leaving westminster as plain resignation is not possible , and granted even though adams had not explicitly made the request .
he was elected to the dail , topping the louth constituency poll with 15,072 brightened 21.7 % printing first preference votes .
in september 2017 , adams said he will allow his name to go forward for a one-year term as president of sinn fein at the november ardfheis , at which point sinn fein would begin a " planned process of generational change , including adams ' own future intentions " .
adams is preparing to stand down as party leader , and that he may run for president of ireland in the next election .
at the ardfheis on 18 november , adams was re-elected for another year as party president , but announced that he would step down at some point in 2018 , and would not seek re-election as td for louth .
adams leadership of sinn fein ended on 10 february 2018 .
on 13 july 2018 , a home-made bomb was thrown at adams ' home in west belfast , damaging a car parked in his driveway .
adams escaped injury and claimed that his two grandchildren were standing in the driveway only ten minutes before the blast .
adams asked that those responsible " come and sit down " and " give us the rationale for this action " .
when the allegations of abuse were first made public in 2009 , gerry adams claimed that his deceased father , gerry adams sr . , had subjected family members to emotional , physical and sexual abuse .
after the conviction of liam adams , john larkin , the attorney general of northern ireland , has been asked to review a 2011 decision not to prosecute gerry adams over an allegation that he has given information in connection with the case .
a statement from the dpp said : " the director of public prosecutions , barra mcgrory qc , recognises that there has been considerable public interest around the decision not to prosecute mr . gerry adams in october 2011 in relation to an allegation that he withheld information in connection with the liam adams case .
adams said : " with hindsight there are things i could have done differently , but i 'm not on trial here .
the tweet was not well received and was deleted , with adams apologising for the use of " nigger " the next day at sinn fein 's connolly house headquarter in belfast .
adams 's use of the slur in the tweet was widely reported in irish , british and american media .
adams stood over the tweet saying : " i stand over the context and main point of my tweet , which were the parallels between people in struggle .
she was inspired by harriet tubman , frederick douglass , rosa parks , martin luther king and malcolm x .
on 4 may 2016 , adams said " the whole thing was to make a political point , if i had left that word out would the tweet have gotten any attention ? "
he also said that " i was paralleling the experiences of the irish , not just in recent times but through the penal days when the irish were sold as slaves , through the cromwellian period " .