although fleming received most of the credit for the discovery of penicillin , it was florey who carried out the first ever clinical trials in 1941 of penicillin at the radcliffe infirmary in oxford on the first patient , a constable from oxford .
florey 's discoveries , along with the discoveries of alexander fleming and ernst chain , are thought to have saved over 200 million lives .
his mother , bertha mary florey , was a second-generation australian .
florey was educated at st peter 's college , adelaide , where academically , he in chemistry and physics , but not mathematics .
he studied medicine at the university of adelaide from 1917 to 1921 .
florey continued his studies at magdalen college , oxford as a rhodes scholar .
he returned to england in 1926 and was elected to a fellowship at gonville and caius college , cambridge , and a year later he received the phd .
after cambridge , florey became the joseph hunter chair of pathology at the university of sheffield in 1932 .
in 1935 , he returned to oxford as professor of pathology and fellow of lincoln college , oxford , leading a team of researchers .
in 1941 , he and chain treated their first patient , albert alexander , who had a small sore at that corner of his mouth .
however , the researchers did not have enough penicillin to help him to a full recovery , and he relapsed and died .
florey shared the 1945 nobel prize in physiology or medicine with ernst boris chain and alexander fleming .
fleming first observed the antibiotic properties of the mould that makes penicillin , but it was chain and florey who developed it into a useful treatment .
in 1958 florey opened the john curtin school of medical research at anu in canberra .
in 1965 the queen made him lord florey .
in 1947 , he was awarded the gold medal of the royal society of medicine .
he was awarded the lister medal in 1945 for his work in surgical science .
the lister oration was given at the royal college of surgeons of england later that year .
he was made a member of the royal society in 1941 and became president in 1958 .
in 1962 , florey became the provost of the queen 's college , oxford .
during his term as provost , the college built a new residential block , named the florey building in his honour .
he was made a life peer in 1965 , and became baron florey , of adelaide in the state of south australia and commonwealth of australia and marston in the county of oxford .
this was a higher honor than the knighthood awarded to penicillin 's discoverer , sir alexander fleming .
florey was chancellor of the university from 1965 until his death in 1968 .
the lecture theatre at the john curtin school of medical research was named after him .
the australian student prize was also called the " lord florey student prize " in recognition of florey .
the florey unit of the royal berkshire hospital in reading , berkshire , is named after him .
it was opened in 1950 .
the building helps science classes for students from year 7 to year 12 .
there is a commemorative statue on the lowest floor .
the marriage was unhappy , due to his poor health and florey 's intolerance .
after the death of his wife ethel , he married in 1967 his long-time colleague and research assistant margaret jenningsbled 1904 – 1994 furnished .
the group of scientists at oxford are headed by florey at the dunn school of pathology .