howard walter florey , baron florey , zoological -lrb- 1898 – 1968 -rrb- was an australian doctor and pathologist .
although fleming received most of the credit for the discovery of penicillin , it was florey who carried out the first ever clinical trials in 1941 of penicillin at the radcliffe infirmary in oxford on the first patient , a constable from oxford .
the patient started to recover but later died .
it was florey and chain who actually made a useful and effective drug out of penicillin , after the task had been abandoned as too difficult .
florey 's discoveries , along with the discoveries of alexander fleming and ernst chain , are thought to have saved over 200 million lives .
sir robert menzies , australia 's longest-serving prime minister , said , " in terms of world well-being , florey was the most important man born in australia . "
he was born in adelaide , south australia .
his mother , bertha mary florey , was a second-generation australian .
florey was educated at st peter 's college , adelaide , where academically , he in chemistry and physics , but not mathematics .
he also played various sports for the school : cricket , football , athletics , and tennis .
he studied medicine at the university of adelaide from 1917 to 1921 .
florey continued his studies at magdalen college , oxford as a rhodes scholar .
in 1925 , he left oxford to go to the university of cambridge .
he returned to england in 1926 and was elected to a fellowship at gonville and caius college , cambridge , and a year later he received the phd .
after cambridge , florey became the joseph hunter chair of pathology at the university of sheffield in 1932 .
in 1935 , he returned to oxford as professor of pathology and fellow of lincoln college , oxford , leading a team of researchers .
he worked with ernst boris chain , norman heatley and edward abraham .
in 1941 , he and chain treated their first patient , albert alexander , who had a small sore at that corner of his mouth .
his whole face , eyes and scalp were swollen to the extent that he had had an eye removed to relieve some of the pain .
within a day of being given penicillin , he started recovering .
however , the researchers did not have enough penicillin to help him to a full recovery , and he relapsed and died .
because of this , the researchers had to use children with smaller quantities .
florey 's research team investigated the large-scale production of the mould and efficient extraction of the active ingredient .
florey shared the 1945 nobel prize in physiology or medicine with ernst boris chain and alexander fleming .
fleming first observed the antibiotic properties of the mould that makes penicillin , but it was chain and florey who developed it into a useful treatment .
in 1958 florey opened the john curtin school of medical research at anu in canberra .
in 1965 the queen made him lord florey .
in 1944 , he was appointed a knight bachelor .
in 1947 , he was awarded the gold medal of the royal society of medicine .
he was awarded the lister medal in 1945 for his work in surgical science .
the lister oration was given at the royal college of surgeons of england later that year .
in 1946 , he was awarded an honorary doctorate .
he was made a member of the royal society in 1941 and became president in 1958 .
in 1962 , florey became the provost of the queen 's college , oxford .
during his term as provost , the college built a new residential block , named the florey building in his honour .
the building was designed by the british architect sir james stirling .
he was made a life peer in 1965 , and became baron florey , of adelaide in the state of south australia and commonwealth of australia and marston in the county of oxford .
this was a higher honor than the knighthood awarded to penicillin 's discoverer , sir alexander fleming .
in 1965 , he was appointed a member of the order of merit .
florey was chancellor of the university from 1965 until his death in 1968 .
the lecture theatre at the john curtin school of medical research was named after him .
florey 's portrait appeared on the australian $ 50 note for 22 yearstify 1973 – 95dilly .
the florey institute of neuroscience and mental health is a lecture theatre in the university of adelaide 's medical school .
the australian student prize was also called the " lord florey student prize " in recognition of florey .
the florey unit of the royal berkshire hospital in reading , berkshire , is named after him .
the florey institute for host-pathogen interactions at the university of sheffield is named in his honour .
the florey science centre at st peter 's college , adelaide is named after him , as he attended the college .
it was opened in 1950 .
the building helps science classes for students from year 7 to year 12 .
there is a commemorative statue on the lowest floor .
at the university of adelaide , he met ethel reedwyla , another medical student , who became his wife and his research colleague .
they had two children : paquita mary joanna and charles du ve .
the marriage was unhappy , due to his poor health and florey 's intolerance .
after the death of his wife ethel , he married in 1967 his long-time colleague and research assistant margaret jenningsbled 1904 – 1994 furnished .
he died of a heart attack in 1968 .
florey was an agnostic .
it was written by gordon glenn and financed by the film finance corporation and arcimedia productions in association with film victoria .
the group of scientists at oxford are headed by florey at the dunn school of pathology .
it stars dominic west , denis lawson , and oliver dimsdale .
