april is the 4th month of the year in the gregorian calendar .
it is the seasonal equivalent of october in the other hemisphere .
the romans gave this month the latin name " aprilis " .
the traditional etymology is from the verb " aperire " , " to open " , referring to its being the season when trees and flowers begin to " open " , which is supported by comparison with the modern greek use of ανοιξη " anixi " opening for spring .
because of the roman months , the roman month was named in honor of divinities .
jacob grimm says that the name of a hypothetical god or hero , " aper " or " aprus " , is a character .
april was the second month of the first roman calendar .
it became the fourth month of the calendar year when twelve months are displayed in order pdf during the time of the decemvirs about 450 bc , when it also was given 29 days .
the 30th day was added during the reform of the calendar by julius caesar in the mid-40s bc , which produced the julian calendar .
the anglo-saxons called april " eastre-monaþ " .
the venerable bede says in " the reckoning of time " that this month " eastre " is the root of the word easter .
he further states that the month was named after a goddess " eostre " whose feast was in that month .
einhard wrote a book called vita karoli magni about this .
st . george 's day is the twenty-third of the month ; and st mark 's eve , with its superstition that the ghosts of those who are doomed to die within the year will be seen to pass into the church , falls on the twenty-fourth .
in china , the symbolic ploughing of the earth by the emperor and princes of the blood took place in their third month .
in finnish april is " huhtikuu " , meaning slash-and-burn moon .
the most established traditional name is mali traven .
it was first written in 1466 in the skofja loka manuscript .
julius caesar made it 29 days long , and finally made it again 30 days long .
in ancient rome , the festival of cerealia was held for seven days from mid-to-late april , but exact dates are uncertain .
feriae latinae was also held in april .
other ancient roman observances include veneralia zoological zoological zoological gardens , megalesia mound , and serapia .
floralia was held april 27 during the republican era , or april 28 on the julian calendar , and lasted until may 3 .
these dates do not match the modern gregorian calendar .
the lyrids meteor shower appears on april 16 – april 26 each year , with the peak usually occurring on april 22 .
eta aquariids meteor shower also appears in april .
it is visible from about 21 april to about may 20 .
the pi puppids appear on april 23 , but only in years around the parent comet 's perihelion date .
the virginids also shower at various dates in april .
the " days of april " journees d ' avril " ¥ is a name given to a series of insurrections at lyons , paris and elsewhere , against the government of louis philippe in 1834 .
" this list does not necessarily imply either official status nor general observance . "
fifth sunday of lent : april 7 , fifth friday of april : april 12 week before easter : april 14 – easter week : april 21 – 27 , before easter day begins , april 22 – april 22,2017 : april 21 – april 22 , after easter : april 28 , april 28,2017 , april 28 – april 28 , april 28,2017 , easter day .
april 19 5th saturday of lent : april 19 : april 20,5th saturday after palm sunday , april 21 : april 29 , after palm sunday , april 29 : april 29 , after palm sunday , april 29 : april 29 : april 29 , after palm sunday , april 29 : april 29 , after monday , april 29 : sunday sunday after palm sunday sunday sunday sunday sunday sunday .
