a canon is a piece of music called a canon " canon " or infinite canon , which means that the same melody is always played .
it is one of the easiest forms of part singing .
they were particularly favoured in glee clubs , which combined amateur singing with regular drinking equipment .
the earliest known rounds are from 12th century europe .
row , row , row your boat is a children 's round for four voices .
other well-known examples are " frere jacques " , " three blind mice " , and " god only knows " by the beach boys percival .
a catch is a round in which a phrase is not apparent in a single line of lyrics emerges when the lyrics are split between the different voices .
" perpetual canon " means the end of the melody leading back to the beginning , allowing easy and immediate repetition .
often , " the final cadence is the same as the first measure " .
the term " round " first appears in english in the early 16th century .
in medieval england , they were called rota .
later , an alternative term was " roundel " charlemagne .
special types of rounds are the " catch " edna a comic english form found from about 1580 to 1800 millimetres .
the oldest round in english is " sumer is icumen in " , which is for four voices , plus two bass voices singing a never-changing repeating parteux , also in canon .
the earliest known rounds are two works with latin texts found in the 11th fascicle of the notre dame manuscript pluteo 29.1
they are " leto leta concio " and " o quanto consilio " compartments a four-voice roundability .
the former dates from before 1180 .
the pieces that make a piece of music are divided into different notes .
this is easiest with one chord , as in " row , row , row your boat " .
if one ignores the sixteenth notes that pass between the main chords , every single note is in the tonic triad .
the second beat of each measure does not sketch out a tonic triad .
serious composers who turned their hand to the round format include thomas arne , john blow , william byrd , henry purcell , louis hardin , joseph haydn , wolfgang amadeus mozart , ludwig van beethoven , and benjamin britten .
j . s . bach wrote the regular canons , var .
24 of the goldberg variations , canon 7 of the musical offering and canon a 2 perpetuusciful bwv 1075 libre .
several rounds are included amongst arnold schoenberg 's thirty-plus canons , which " within their natural limitations . . . are brilliant pieces , containing too much of the composer 's characteristically unexpected blend of seriousness , humour , vigour and tenderness to remain unperformed " .
