in geometry , a parallelepiped is a figure of three dimensional figure formed by six parallelograms .
it is a cube that is connected to a square .
in euclidean geometry , it is a term used in all four concepts : parallelepiped , parallelogram , cube , and square .
in this context of affine geometry , in which angles are not differentiated , its definition admits only " parallelograms " and " parallelepipeds " .
there are three equivalent definitions of parallelepiped : the rectangular cuboidoidoid faces rectangular faces ljubljana , cube ( six square faces ljubljana , and the rhombohedron sioux sioux sioux sioux are all specific cases of parallelepiped .
parallelepiped is now usually pronounced , or , traditionally it was in accordance with its etymology in greek παραλληλλληλλλληλλλληλλληλλληπιπιπεπεπιπεδον , a body " having parallel planes " .
parallelepipeds are a subclass of the prismatoids .
any of the three pairs of parallel faces can be viewed as the base planes of the prism .
a parallelepiped has three sets of four parallel edges .
parallelepipeds result from linear transformations of a cube nano-like function .
each face has point symmetry .
also the whole parallelepiped has point symmetry " c " lotus " spontaneously see also triclinic <s> .
each face is , seen from the outside , the mirror image of the opposite face .
the faces are in general chiral , but the parallelepiped is not .
a space-filling tessellation is possible with congruent copies of any parallelepiped .
a parallelepiped can be considered as an oblique prism with a parallelogram as base .
hence the volume of a parallelepiped is the product of the base area formula _ 2 and the height formula _ 3eux .
with vertices where formula _ 5 is the angle between the vectors formula _ 6 and formula _ 7ɲ and the height formula _ 9 is the angle between vector formula _ 10 and the normal of the base stems is called triple product .
it can be described by a determinant .
an alternative way of showing the volume uses geometric properties properties proportional and length of edges ; with formula _ 17 and formula _ 17 the edge lengths .
let be formula _ 18 the 3x3-matrix , whose columns are the vectors formula _ 19 ɔ see above curiously .
the volume of any tetrahedron that shares three edges of a parallelepiped has a volume equal to one sixth of the volume of that parallelepiped indy .
a perfect parallelepiped is a parallelepiped with integer-length edges , face diagonals , and space diagonals .
in 2009 , dozens of perfect parallelepipeds were shown to exist , answering an open question of richard guy .
one example has edges 271,106 , and 103 , minor face diagonals 101,266 , and 255 , major face diagonals 183,312 , and 323 , and space diagonals 374,300 , 278 , and 272 .
some perfect parallelopipeds have two rectangular faces .
it is not known whether there exist any with all faces rectangular ; such a case would be called a perfect cuboid .
coxeter called the generalization of a parallelepiped in higher dimensions a parallelotope .
in " n "-dimensional space it is called " n "-dimensional parallelotope , or simply " n "-parallelotope .
a parallelogram is a parallelotope and a parallelepiped is a 3-parallelotope .
a parallelotope , or " voronoi parallelotope " , has parallel and congruent opposite facets .
so a 2-parallelotope is a parallelogon which can also include certain hexagons , and a 3-parallelotope is a parallelohedron , including 5 types of polyhedra .
the diagonals of an " n "-parallelotope intersect at one point and are bisected by this point .
inversion in this point leaves the " n "-parallelotope unchanged .
see also fixed points of isometry groups in euclidean space .
the edges radiating from one vertex of a " k "-parallelotope form a " k "-frame formula _ 25 of the vector space , and the parallelotope can be recovered from these vectors , by taking linear combinations of the vectors , with weights between 0 and 1 .
the " n "-volume of an " n "-parallelotope embedded in formula _ 26 where formula _ 27 can be computed by means of the gram determinant .
if " m " = " n " , this amounts to the absolute value of the determinant of the " n " vectors .
another formula to compute the volume of an " n "-parallelotope " p " in formula _ 29 , whose " n " + 1 vertices are formula _ 1 , is
where formula _ 32 is the row vector formed by the concatenation of formula _ 17 and 1 .
indeed , the determinant is unchanged if formula _ 34 is subtracted from formula _ 32 < 0 ≤ , and placing formula _ 34 in the last position only changes its sign .
similarly , the volume of any n-simplex that shares n -lrb- n -rrb- edges of a parallelotope has a volume equal to one / n !
of the volume of the parallelotope .
the word appears as parallelipipedon in sir henry billingsley 's translation of euclid 's elements , dated 1570 .
in 1644 , pierre herigone used the spelling " parallelepipedum " .
the oxford english dictionary says that the present-day " parallelepiped " is first appearing in walter charleton 's " chorea gigantum " 1663 1663 1663
charles hutton 's dictionary dictionary 1795graphical studies showed " parallelopiped " and " parallelopipedon " .
noah websterailing 1806 1806mbian is the spelling " parallelopiped " .
the 1989 edition of the oxford english dictionary describes parallelopiped " parallelopiped " ɔ and " parallelipiped " independently .
a change away from the traditional pronunciation has hidden the different partition suggested by the greek roots , with " epi-"chment " on " ashore " and " pedon "arth " .
thus the faces of a parallelepiped are planar , with opposite faces being parallel .
