lake eyre is the largest lake in australia .
it is in the south of adelaide , about 700 km north of adelaide .
when the lake is full , it has the same salinity level as the sea , but as the lake dries up and the water evaporates , salinity increases .
the lake was named by europeans in honour of edward eyre , who was the first european to see it , in 1840 .
the lake 's official name was changed in december 2012 to combine the name " lake eyre " with the indigenous name , kati thanda .
the native title over the lake and surrounding region is held by the arabana people .
lake eyre is in the deserts of central australia , in the northern part of south australia .
the lake eyre basin is a large endorheic system surrounding the lakebed .
even in the dry season , there is usually some water remaining in lake eyre .
the lake was formed by processes after tectonic upwarping up to the south subsequent to the end of the pleistocene epoch .
during the rainy season , rivers from the north-east part of the lake eyre basin flow towards the lake through the channel country .
if it does , how deep the lake will get .
the average rainfall in the area of the lake is 100 to per year .
the-15 m altitude usually attributed to kati thanda – lake eyre refers to the deepest parts of the lake floor , in belt bay and the madigan gulf .
the shoreline is at-9 m .
the lake is the area of the great amount of sediment in the lake eyre .
the goyder channel is formed by the goyder channel .
these are known as lake eyre north , which is 144 km in length and 65 km wide , and lake eyre south , which measures 65 by .
the salt crusts are thickest , up to 50 cm -lrb- 7.5 in -rrb- in the southern belt bay , jackboot bay and madigan gulf sub-basins of lake eyre north .
since 1883 , proposals have been made to flood lake eyre with seawater brought to the basin via a canal or pipeline .
the purpose was to increase evaporation and increase rainfall in the region downwind of an enlarged lake eyre .
the added rainfall has been modeled as small .
due to the basin 's low elevation below sea level and the region 's high annual evaporation rateologies between 2500 and dq , such schemes have generally been considered impractical , as it is likely that accumulation of salt deposits would rapidly block the engineered channel .
at a rate of 1 cm evaporation per day , a 3 m viaduct flowing a 0.5 m / s would supply enough water to create a 100 km -lrb- 100 km -rrb- sea .
if the water was not sent back to the ocean , it would precipitate 90000 tons of salt every year .
the salt crust dissolves over a period of six months .
when over 4m deep , the lake is no more salty than the sea .
the lake takes on a pink color when saturated .
a fill or near fill fill fill fill fill is a few times a century .
the water in the lake soon evaporates , with a minor or medium flood drying by the end of the next summer .
most of the water entering the lakes enters the lake .
in strong la nina years , the lake can fill .
since 1885 , this has happened in 1886-1887,1889-1890,1916-1917,1950 , 1955,1974-1977 , and 1999-2001 .
local rain fill the lake as many as three more rain .
it was very heavy , but only placed a small amount of water into it .
when flooded , the lake is almost fresh .
the 2009 lake eyre flood peaked at 1.5 m deep in late may .
9 km3 of water crossed the queensland – south australian border with most of it coming from massive floods in the georgina river .
this is because of the very low rainfall in the lower reaches of these rivers rainfall .
as the flood did not start filling the lake 's deepest pointometric pointgement until late march , little bird life appeared , preferring instead to nest in the upper reaches of the lake eyre basin , north of birdsville , where large lakes appeared in january as a result of monsoonal rain .
the high rainfall in summer 2010 sent flood water into the diamantina , georgina and cooper creek catchments of the lake eyre .
the higher rainfall prompted many different birds to move back to the area for breeding .
heavy local rain in early march 2011 in the stuart creek and warriner catchments filled lake eyre south , with lake eyre north about 75 % covered with water firstly from the neales and macumba rivers , and later from the warburton river .
in late 2015 , water began flowing into lake eyre after heavy rain in the north-east of the state .
in late march 2019 , floodwaters began arriving as a result of torrential rains in northern queensland in january .
in the past , the water had taken anywhere from three to ten months to reach the lake .
the first flooding would be closely followed by another surge , following rains produced by cyclone trevor .
traditional owners and graziers say that it is essential that the river run its course and should not be harvested during floods , as any interference in the natural systems could damage the ecosystem .
the lake eyre yacht club is a group of sailors who sail on the lake 's floods .
a number of 6 m trailer sailers sailed on lake eyre in 1975,1976 , and 1984 , when the flood depth reached 3 – .
in july 2010 the yacht club held its first regatta since 1976 .
the cooper had reached lake eyre for the first time since 1990 .
when the lake is full , a notable phenomenon is that around midday the surface can often become very flat .
the surface then reflects the sky in a way that leaves both the horizon and water surface virtually impossible to see .
the commodore of the lake eyre yacht club has stated that sailing during this time has the appearance of sailing in the sky .
it has been a site for various land speed record attempts on its salt flats .
phytoplankton in the lake includes " nodularia spumigena " and a number of species of " dunaliella " .
birds such as pelicans and banded stilts are drawn to a filled lake from southern coastal regions of australia , and from as far as papua new guinea .
during the 1989 – 1990 flood , about 200,000 pelicans , 80 % of australia 's total population came to feed & roost at lake eyre .
scientists are now unable to know how such birds appear able to detect the filling of the lake , even when hundreds or thousands of kilometres away from the basin .
the extent of the lake is covered by two protected areas .
lake eyre is on the list of important wetlands in australia .
lake eyre has been identified by birdlife international as an important bird areawyl ibacise known as the lake eyre important bird area .
