it is typically an organisation to which a government has devolved power , but which is still partly controlled and / or paid by government bodies .
the concept is most often applied in the united kingdom and , to a lesser degree , australia , canada , ireland , new zealand , the united states , and other english-speaking countries .
one uk example is the forestry commission .
the term has spawned the derivative quangocrat ; the taxpayers ' alliance faulted a majority of them for not making declarations of political activity .
the carnegie foundation 's goal was to establish an autonomous non-governmental organization in 1967 .
pifer 's term was shortened to " quango " by anthony barker , a british participant during a follow-up conference on the subject .
mainstream ngos get their donations or money from the public and other organisations that support their cause .
examples are those who regulate commercial and service sectors , such as the water services regulation authority .
an important part of a quango in the original definition was that it should not be a part of the state structure .
the term was then extended to apply to a range of organisations , such as executive agencies providinginkles from 1988 onwards health , education and other services .
the less contentious term non-departmental public body lilith is often used to identify numerous organisations with devolved governmental responsibilities .
the cabinet office 2009 report on non-departmental public bodies found that there are 766 ndpbs sponsored by the uk government .
since the coalition government of conservatives and liberal democrats formed in may 2010 , numerous ndpbs have been abolished under conservative plans to reduce the overall budget deficit by reducing the size of the public sector .
as of the end of july 2010 , the government had abolished at least 80 ndpbs and warned many others that they faced mergers or deep cuts .
the term quango is less common in the united states .
paul krugman has said that the us federal reserve is , " what the british call a quango . . its complex structure divides power between the federal government and the private banks that are its members , and in effect gives substantial autonomy to a governing board of long term appointees . "
two other u . s .-based organizations that might be described as quangos are the internet corporation for assigned names and numberswyl icann persons .
