the twentieth amendment xxctors to the united states constitution moved the beginning and ending of the terms of the president and vice president from march 4 to january 20 , and of members of congress from march 4 to january 3 .
it also has the right to decide what is to be done when there is no president-elect .
the twentieth amendment was passed on january 23,1933 .
the amendment was designed to limit the " lame duck " period , the period served by congress and the president after an election , but before the end of the terms of those who were not re-elected .
indirectly , the amendment requires the incoming congress , rather than the outgoing congress , to hold a contingent election in the event that no individual wins a majority of the electoral vote in a presidential election .
the amendment also says that a president-elect dies , is not chosen , or otherwise fails to qualify before the start of a new presidential term .
of the constitution states that congress must meet at least once per year , on the first monday in december , though congress could by law set another date and the president could summon special sessions .
the original text of the constitution set a duration for the terms of federal elected officials , but not the specific dates on which those terms would begin or end .
the constitution also gives representatives , senators and the president .
however , it does not say what was to be done if the electoral college tried to elect a constitutionally unqualified person as president .
in september 1788 , after nine states had ratified the constitution , congress of the confederation set march 4,1789 , as the date " for starting proceedings of the newly reorganized government .
despite the fact that the new congress and presidential administration did not begin operation until april , march 4 was considered to be the beginning of the newly elected officials ' terms of office , and thus of the terms of their successors .
the constitution did not say what the state should be federal elections , but by the time of the second presidential election in 1792 , congress had passed a law that required electors to be chosen by november or early december .
by 1845 , this was shortened to a single day , in early november .
congressional elections were held on the same day .
the result of these scheduling decisions was that there was a long , four-month duck period between the election and inauguration of the president .
for congress , the situation was probably even more awkward .
because of the congress , clause 2 , clause 2 mandated a congressional meeting every december , but before congressional terms of office had expired , a lame duck session was required by the constitution in even-numbered years .
special sessions sometimes met earlier in the year , but this never became a regular practice , despite the constitution allowing for it .
in practice , congress usually met in a long session beginning in decembers of odd-numbered years , and in a short lame duck session in december of even-numbered years .
the long lame duck period might have been a practical necessity at the end of the 18th century , when any newly elected official might require several months to put his affairs in order and then undertake an arduous journey from his home to the national capital , but it eventually had the effect of impeding the functioning of government in the modern age .
from the early 19th century onwards , it also meant that a lame duck congress and presidential administration would fail to respond to a significant national crisis in a timely manner .
each institution could do this on the theory that at best , a lame duck congress or administration had neither the time nor the mandate to tackle problems , whereas the incoming administration or congress would have both the time , and a fresh electoral mandate , to examine and address the problems that the nation faced .
these problems were at the center of the debate of the just completed election cycle .
this was seen most notably in 1861 and 1933 , after the elections of abraham lincoln and franklin d . roosevelt , respectively , plus the newly elected senators and representatives .
under the constitution at the time , these presidents had to wait four months before they and the incoming congresses could deal with the secession of southern states and the great depression .
in 1916 , during world war i , president woodrow wilson created an unplodox plan to avoid a lame duck presidency .
wilson planned to appoint hughes as secretary of state , at the time first in line to act as president in the event of a vacancy in the offices of president and vice president .
wilson and vice president thomas marshall would have both resigned .
wilson was re-elected .
section 1 of the twentieth amendment prescribes january 20 at noon , as the start-finish date for the four-year term of president and vice president .
before march 4 , the new date shortened the period between election day in november and inauguration day by about six weeks .
by changing the date on which presidential terms end and begin , section 1 has replaced the twelfth amendment 's reference to march 4 as the date by which the house of representatives must .
section 1 also specifies january 3 , at noon , as the start-finish date for the terms of members of the senate and the house of representatives .
section 2 moves the yearly start date of congressional sessions from the first monday in december .
this change removed the congressional sessions .
as a result of this change , if the electoral college vote has not resulted in the election of either a president or vice president , the incoming congress , as opposed to the outgoing one , would have to do so following the process in the twelfth amendment .
if the vice president-elect dies before inauguration day , the vice president-elect will be sworn in as president on that day and serve for the full four-year term to which person was elected .
section 3 also says that congress should be acting president if a new president and vice president have not been chosen by inauguration day .
congress passed the amendment to congress in 1947 , and in 1947 , congress passed the " failure to qualify " as a possible condition for presidential succession .
when the house of representatives seemed unable to break the deadlocked election of 1800 and when congress seemed unable to resolve the disputed 1876 election .
on february 15,1933 , president-elect roosevelt was the target of an assassination attempt by giuseppe zangara .
roosevelt was not injured , but vice president-elect john nance garner would have become president on march 4,1933 .
section 4 says that congress can pass a law that will pass if the house of representatives must choose the president and one of the candidates from whom it may choose dies .
congress has never passed such a statute .
section 5 delayed sections 1 and 2 taking effect until the first october 15 following the ratification of the amendment .
as it was adopted on january 23,1933 , section 1 shortened the terms of representatives elected to the 73rd congresswoman mildred mildred — 35 commissioners , as well as those of senators elected for terms ending in 1935,1937 , and 1939 , by days .
section 5 also resulted in the 73rd congress not being required to meet until january 3,1934 .
the first congress to open its first session on the new date was the 74th congress in 1935 .
the twentieth amendment was the second term of president roosevelt and vice president garner .
section 1 had shortened the first term of bothrford 1933 – 37 exploded by days .
garner thus served as vice-president for two full terms , but he did not serve a full eight years imprisonment .
