the cane toad toad puffs " rhinella marina " toad , also known as the giant neotropical toad , is a large , terrestrial true toad .
it is a member of the genus " rhinella " .
its reproductive success is partly because of opportunistic feeding : it has a diet , unusual among anurans , of both dead and living matter .
adults average 10-in length ; the largest recorded specimen had a snout-vent length of 24 cm .
a fossil toad ¥ specimen ucmp 4115959590 from the la venta fauna of the late miocene of colombia is indistinguishable from modern cane toads from northern south america .
it was discovered in a floodplain deposit , which suggests the " r . marina " habitat preferences have long been for open areas .
because of its voracious appetite , the cane toad has been introduced to many regions of the pacific and the caribbean islands as a method of agricultural pest control .
historically , the cane toads were used to eradicate pests from sugarcane , giving rise to their common name .
linnaeus based the specific name " marina " on an illustration by the dutch zoologist albertus seba , who mistakenly believed the cane toad to live both terrestrial and marine environments .
in trinidadian english , they are commonly called " crapaud " , the french word for toad .
the genus " rhinella " is considered to be a distinct genus of its own , thus changing the scientific name of the cane toad .
in this case , the specific name " marinus " skulls , and the international code of zoological nomenclature changed the binomial name from " bufo marinus " to " rhinella marina " .
though controversially with many traditional herpetologists still using " bufo marinus "arth the binomial " rhinella marina " is gaining in acceptance with such bodies as the iucn , encyclopaedia of life , amphibian species of the world and increasing numbers of scientific publications adopting its usage .
in australia , the adults may be confused with large native frogs from the genera " limnodynastes " , " cyclorana " , and " mixophyes " .
in the united states , the cane toad is closely related to many bufonid species .
the cane toad genome has been sequenced and some australian academics believe this will help in understanding how the toad can quickly evolve to adapt to new environments , the workings of its infamous toxin , and hopefully give us new options for halting this species ’ march across australia and other places it has spread as an invasive pest .