The crystallinity of ceramic materials ranges from highly oriented to semi-crystalline, vitrified, and often completely amorphous (e.g., glasses).
Varying crystallinity and electron composition in the ionic and covalent bonds cause most ceramic materials to be good thermal and electrical insulators (extensively researched in ceramic engineering).
General properties such as high melting temperature, high hardness, poor conductivity, high moduli of elasticity, chemical resistance and low ductility are the norm, with known exceptions to each of these rules (e.g.
Many composites, such as fiberglass and carbon fiber, while containing ceramic materials, are not considered to be part of the ceramic family.
Later ceramics were glazed and fired to create smooth, colored surfaces, decreasing porosity through the use of glassy, amorphous ceramic coatings on top of the crystalline ceramic substrates.
In the 20th century, new ceramic materials were developed for use in advanced ceramic engineering, such as in semiconductors.
The earliest known mention of the root "ceram-" is the Mycenaean Greek , "workers of ceramics", written in Linear B syllabic script.
Glass is often not considered a ceramic because of its amorphous (noncrystalline) character.
However, glassmaking involves several steps of the ceramic process, and its mechanical properties are similar to ceramic materials.
Both are valued for their abrasion resistance and hence find use in applications such as the wear plates of crushing equipment in mining operations.
The physical properties of any ceramic substance are a direct result of its crystalline structure and chemical composition.
Solid-state chemistry reveals the fundamental connection between microstructure and properties such as localized density variations, grain size distribution, type of porosity and second-phase content, which can all be correlated with ceramic properties such as mechanical strength σ by the Hall-Petch equation, hardness, toughness, dielectric constant, and the optical properties exhibited by transparent materials.
Evaluation and characterization of ceramic microstructures is often implemented on similar spatial scales to that used commonly in the emerging field of nanotechnology: from tens of angstroms (A) to tens of micrometers (μm).
The fabrication method and process conditions are generally indicated by the microstructure.
The root cause of many ceramic failures is evident in the cleaved and polished microstructure.
It applies the physics of stress and strain, in particular the theories of elasticity and plasticity, to the microscopic crystallographic defects found in real materials in order to predict the macroscopic mechanical failure of bodies.
A material held together by either type of bond will tend to fracture before any plastic deformation takes place, which results in poor toughness in these materials.
Additionally, because these materials tend to be porous, the pores and other microscopic imperfections act as stress concentrators, decreasing the toughness further, and reducing the tensile strength.
It is therefore neglected in many applications of ceramic materials.
To overcome the brittle behaviour, ceramic material development has introduced the class of ceramic matrix composite materials, in which ceramic fibers are embedded and with specific coatings are forming fiber bridges across any crack.
This process allows the finite control of the microstructure of the ceramic material and therefore the control of the mechanical properties.
The applications of this oxide strengthening technique are important for solid oxide fuel cells and also water filtration devices.
First an aqueous colloidal suspension must be prepared containing the dissolved ceramic powder, say Yttria Stablized Zirconia (YSZ).
After the ceramic precursor is ensured to be evenly dispersed throughout the colloidal solution then next processing step may begin.
Inside the solution, as it is cooling, these ice crystals force the dissolved YSZ particles to the solidification front of the solid-liquid interphase boundary.
At this stage of the process we have pure ice crystals lined up in a unidirectional fashion alongside concentrated pockets of the YSZ colloidal particles.
The sample is simultaneously heated and the pressure is reduced enough to force to ice crystals to subliminate, since the sample is also heated the YSZ pockets begin to anneal together too form the first macroscopically aligned ceramic microstuctures.
The sample is then further sintered to confirm the evaporation of the residual water and the final consolidation of the ceramic microstructure.
During the execution of this technique a few variables can be controlled to influence the pore size and morphology of the microstructure.
These important variables of the ice-templating technique are namely the initial solids loading of the colloid, the cooling rate, the sintering temperature and time length, and also it has been shown that certain additives can influence the micro-structural morphology during this process.
A good understanding of these parameters is essential to understanding the relationships between processing, microstructure, and mechanical properties of anisotropically porous materials.
While there are prospects of mass-producing blue LEDs from zinc oxide, ceramicists are most interested in the electrical properties that show grain boundary effects.
Once the voltage across the device reaches the threshold, there is a breakdown of the electrical structure in the vicinity of the grain boundaries, which results in its electrical resistance dropping from several megohms down to a few hundred ohms.
This makes them ideal for surge-protection applications; as there is control over the threshold voltage and energy tolerance, they find use in all sorts of applications.
The best demonstration of their ability can be found in electrical substations, where they are employed to protect the infrastructure from lightning strikes.
They have rapid response, are low maintenance, and do not appreciably degrade from use, making them virtually ideal devices for this application.
When various gases are passed over a polycrystalline ceramic, its electrical resistance changes.
The reason for this is not understood, but there are two major families of superconducting ceramics.
Piezoelectricity, a link between electrical and mechanical response, is exhibited by a large number of ceramic materials, including the quartz used to measure time in watches and other electronics.
Such devices use both properties of piezoelectrics, using electricity to produce a mechanical motion (powering the device) and then using this mechanical motion to produce electricity (generating a signal).
The unit of time measured is the natural interval required for electricity to be converted into mechanical energy and back again.
These materials can be used to inter convert between thermal, mechanical, or electrical energy; for instance, after synthesis in a furnace, a pyroelectric crystal allowed to cool under no applied stress generally builds up a static charge of thousands of volts.
Such materials are used in motion sensors, where the tiny rise in temperature from a warm body entering the room is enough to produce a measurable voltage in the crystal.
In turn, pyroelectricity is seen most strongly in materials which also display the ferroelectric effect, in which a stable electric dipole can be oriented or reversed by applying an electrostatic field.
The most common such materials are lead zirconate titanate and barium titanate.
Aside from the uses mentioned above, their strong piezoelectric response is exploited in the design of high-frequency loudspeakers, transducers for sonar, and actuators for atomic force and scanning tunneling microscopes.
Increases in temperature can cause grain boundaries to suddenly become insulating in some semiconducting ceramic materials, mostly mixtures of heavy metal titanates.
The critical transition temperature can be adjusted over a wide range by variations in chemistry.
In such materials, current will pass through the material until joule heating brings it to the transition temperature, at which point the circuit will be broken and current flow will cease.
Such ceramics are used as self-controlled heating elements in, for example, the rear-window defrost circuits of automobiles.
While a lack of temperature control would rule out any practical use of the material near its critical temperature, the dielectric effect remains exceptionally strong even at much higher temperatures.
Titanates with critical temperatures far below room temperature have become synonymous with "ceramic" in the context of ceramic capacitors for just this reason.
Frequency selective optical filters can be utilized to alter or enhance the brightness and contrast of a digital image.
Guided lightwave transmission via frequency selective waveguides involves the emerging field of fiber optics and the ability of certain glassy compositions as a transmission medium for a range of frequencies simultaneously (multi-mode optical fiber) with little or no interference between competing wavelengths or frequencies.
Also of value to the emerging materials scientist is the sensitivity of materials to radiation in the thermal infrared (IR) portion of the electromagnetic spectrum.
Thus, there is an increasing need in the military sector for high-strength, robust materials which have the capability to transmit light (electromagnetic waves) in the visible (0.4 – 0.7 micrometers) and mid-infrared (1 – 5 micrometers) regions of the spectrum.
In the 1960s, scientists at General Electric (GE) discovered that under the right manufacturing conditions, some ceramics, especially aluminium oxide (alumina), could be made translucent.
These translucent materials were transparent enough to be used for containing the electrical plasma generated in high-pressure sodium street lamps.
During the past two decades, additional types of transparent ceramics have been developed for applications such as nose cones for heat-seeking missiles, windows for fighter aircraft, and scintillation counters for computed tomography scanners.
In the early 1970s, Thomas Soules pioneered computer modeling of light transmission through translucent ceramic alumina.
His model showed that microscopic pores in ceramic, mainly trapped at the junctions of microcrystalline grains, caused light to scatter and prevented true transparency.
Opacity results from the incoherent scattering of light at surfaces and interfaces.
In addition to pores, most of the interfaces in a typical metal or ceramic object are in the form of grain boundaries which separate tiny regions of crystalline order.
When the size of the scattering center (or grain boundary) is reduced below the size of the wavelength of the light being scattered, the scattering no longer occurs to any significant extent.
In the formation of polycrystalline materials (metals and ceramics) the size of the crystalline grains is determined largely by the size of the crystalline particles present in the raw material during formation (or pressing) of the object.
Moreover, the size of the grain boundaries scales directly with particle size.
Thus a reduction of the original particle size below the wavelength of visible light (~ 0.5 micrometers for shortwave violet) eliminates any light scattering, resulting in a transparent material.
Recently , Japanese scientists have developed techniques to produce ceramic parts that rival the transparency of traditional crystals (grown from a single seed) and exceed the fracture toughness of a single crystal.
In particular, scientists at the Japanese firm Konoshima Ltd., a producer of ceramic construction materials and industrial chemicals, have been looking for markets for their transparent ceramics.
In particular, a Livermore research team began to acquire advanced transparent ceramics from Konoshima to determine if they could meet the optical requirements needed for Livermore’s Solid-State Heat Capacity Laser (SSHCL).
Livermore researchers have also been testing applications of these materials for applications such as advanced drivers for laser-driven fusion power plants.
Frequently, the raw materials of modern ceramics do not include clays.
Ceramic artifacts have an important role in archaeology for understanding the culture, technology and behavior of peoples of the past.
They are among the most common artifacts to be found at an archaeological site, generally in the form of small fragments of broken pottery called sherds.
By creating these typologies it is possible to distinguish between different cultural styles, the purpose of the ceramic and technological state of the people among other conclusions.
In addition, by looking at stylistic changes of ceramics over time is it possible to separate (seriate) the ceramics into distinct diagnostic groups (assemblages).
A comparison of ceramic artifacts with known dated assemblages allows for a chronological assignment of these pieces.
The technical approach to ceramic analysis involves a finer examination of the composition of ceramic artifacts and sherds to determine the source of the material and through this the possible manufacturing site.
Key criteria are the composition of the clay and the temper used in the manufacture of the article under study: temper is a material added to the clay during the initial production stage, and it is used to aid the subsequent drying process.
Temper is usually identified by microscopic examination of the temper material.
By estimating both the clay and temper compositions, and locating a region where both are known to occur, an assignment of the material source can be made.