octahedra is a polyhedron with eight faces , twelve edges , and six vertices .
the term is most commonly used to refer to the regular octahedron , a platonic solid composed of eight equilateral triangles , four of which meet at each vertex .
a regular octahedron is a polyhedron .
it is a tetrahedron .
it is a square bipyramid .
it is also a triangular antiprism in any of four orientations .
an octahedron is a three-dimensional concept .
a regular octahedron is a 3-ball in the manhattan biennale .
if the edge length of a regular octahedron is " a " , the radius of a circumscribed sphere makes one that touches the octahedron at all vertices vertices vertices vertices ¥ is possible .
and the radius of an inscribed sphere makes tangent to each of the octahedron 's faces ¥ ¥ .
the midradius touches the middle of each edge .
the octahedron has four special orthogonal projections , centered , on an edge , vertex , face , and normal to a face .
the second and third are the b and a coxeter planes .
the octahedron can be drawn as a flat flat , straight line , projected onto the plane via a stereographic projection .
this projection is a way of preserving the angles but not areas or lengths .
straight lines are projected as circular arcs on the plane .
an octahedron with edge length can be placed with its center at the origin and its vertices on the coordinate axes ; the cartesian coordinates of the vertices are then then then put on the cartesian coordinates .
in an " x "-"-" z "-" cartesian coordinate system , the octahedron with center coordinates coordinates coordinates coordinates coordinatesialsialsials " a " , " b " , " c " foley and radius " r " is the set of all points hamasaki " x " , " y " , " z " .
the surface area is twiceosis because we have 8 rather than 4 triangles triangles triangles .
if an octahedron has been stretched so that it obeys the equation
the surface area and volume expand to become bigger .
the inertia tensor of the stretched octahedron is also the inertia tensor .
these reduce to the equations for the regular octahedron when
the inside of the compound is a two tetrahedra .
a regular octahedron is the result of cutting off from a regular tetrahedron , four regular tetrahedra of half the linear size ;
the vertices of the octahedron are at the middle of the edges of the tetrahedron .
one can also divide the edges of an octahedron in the ratio of the golden mean to define the vertices of an icosahedron .
this is done by first placing vectors along the octahedron 's edges .
together they define a " regular compound " .
octahedra and tetrahedra can be alternated to form a vertex , edge , and face-uniform tessellation of space , called the octet truss by buckminster fuller .
it is one of the 28 convex uniform honeycombs .
another is a tessellation of octahedra and cuboctahedra .
the octahedron is unique among the platonic solids in having an even number of faces meeting at each vertex .
consequently , it is the only member of that group to have mirror planes that do not pass through any of the faces .
using the standard nomenclature for johnson solids , an octahedron would be called a " square bipyramid " .
truncation of two opposite vertices results in a square bifrustum .
the octahedron is 4-connected , so it takes the removal of four vertices to disconnect the remaining vertices .
it is one of only four-connected simplicial well-covered polyhedra , meaning that all of the maximal independent sets of its vertices have the same size .
the other three polyhedra with this property are the pentagonal dipyramid , the snub disphenoid , and an irregular polyhedron with 12 vertices and 20 triangular faces .
there are 3 uniform colorings of the octahedron .
the octahedron 's symmetry group is o , of order 48 , the three-dimensional hyperoctahedral group .
this group includes dzong order 12 indexed , the symmetry group of a triangular antiprism ; d dq order 16ciful order , the symmetry group of a square bipyramid ; and thedral order 24 foley , the symmetry group of a rectified tetrahedron .
different colors of the faces can be added .
it has eleven nets .
the octahedron is a polyhedron .
tetrahemihexahedron is a tetrahedral symmetry faceting of the regular octahedron , sharing edge and vertex arrangement .
it has four of the triangular faces , and three central squares .
the following polyhedra are combinatorially equivalent to the regular polyhedron .
they all have six vertices , eight triangular faces , and twelve edges that correspond one-for-one with the features of a regular octahedron .
an octahedron is a polyhedron with eight faces .
the regular octahedron has 6 vertices and 12 edges .
there are 257 topologically distinct octahedra , excluding mirror images .
more specifically , there are 2,11 , 42,74 , 38,14 for octahedra with 6 to 12 vertices .
polyhedra are " topologically distinct " if they have different arrangements of faces and vertices .
a framework of repeating tetrahedrons and octahedrons was invented by buckminster fuller in the 1950s .
a regular octahedron can be added into a tetrahedron by adding 4 tetrahedra on alternated faces .
adding tetrahedra to all 8 faces creates the stellatedron .
the octahedron is a family of uniform polyhedra related to the cube .
it is also one of the simplest examples of a hypersimplex , a polytope formed by certain intersections of a hypercube with a hyperplane .
the octahedron is a sequence of regular polyhedra with schlafli symbolshesis 3 , " n " whenever the plane is added .
the regular octahedron can also be considered a " rectified tetrahedron " .
this can be shown by a 2-color model .
with this coloring , the octahedron has tetrahedral symmetry .
the above shapes may also be used as slices orthogonal to the long diagonal of a tesseract .
if the first set is in a row , then the first five slices above occur at heights " r " , " s " , and " s " , where " r " is any number in the range 0 < " r " ≤ , and " s " is any number in the range ≤ " s " < 1 .
the octahedron as a " tetratetrahedron " exists in a sequence of quasiregular polyhedra and tilings with vertex configurationseux 3 .
" n " enters the sphere and then into the hyperbolic plane .
with orbifold notation symmetry of * n 32 all of these tilings are wythoff constructions within a fundamental domain of symmetry , with generator points at the right corner of the domain .
the octahedron is related to the hexagonal symmetry family .
