article six of the united states constitution creates the laws and treaties of the united states .
the first clause of the article says that debts of the constitution are still valid , as they were under the articles of confederation .
clause two says that the constitution , federal laws made by it , and treaties made under its authority constitute the supreme law of the land .
in case of conflict between federal and state law , the federal law must be applied .
even state constitutions are in the same way as federal law .
the supreme court under john marshall federer created the marshall court .
it first said that it had the power to review the decisions of state courts allegedly in conflict with the supreme law , claims of " state sovereignty " notwithstanding .
in " martin v . hunter 's lessee "ziernick , the supreme court ruled that the state supreme court had ruled unconstitutional .
the court ruled that the judiciary act could hear appeals from state courts , on the grounds that congress passed it under the supremacy clause .
the supreme court has also struck down attempts by states to control or direct the affairs of federal institutions .
mcculloch v . maryland -lrb- 1819 – 1819 -rrb- was a significant case in this regard .
the state of maryland had a tax on banks not chartered by the state .
marshall wrote that " the states have no power , by taxation or otherwise , to retard , impede , burden , or in any manner control , the operations of the constitutional laws enacted by congress to carry into execution the powers vested in the general government . "
u . s . property is wholly immune to state taxation .
congress may explicitly provide immunity from taxation in certain cases , for instance by immunizing a federal contractor .
federal employees may not be immunized from taxes , as the tax would not be in any way impede government activities .
gibbons v . ogden was a landmark case involving the supremacy clause .
the state of new york had given aaron ogden a monopoly over the steamboat business in the hudson river .
thomas gibbons got a federal permit under the coastal licensing act to perform the same task .
the supreme court of the united states said that the federal permit was not approved .
john marshall wrote that the nullity of an act was not a part of the constitution .
the right to the constitution gives the same power to laws and treaties .
in every such case , the act of congress , or the treaty , is supreme ; and the law of the state , though enacted in the exercise of powers not controverted , must yield to it . "
" reid v . covert " ruled that no branch of the united states government can have powers given to it by treaty that have not been given by the united states constitution .
the third clause is bound by oath or affirmation to support the constitution .
congress may decide the oath of an oath .
the supreme court found that the law was unconstitutional " ex post facto " law .
congress may not require religious tests for an office under the united states .
congress may include the customary words " so help me god " in an oath , but an individual would be under no compulsion to utter them , as such a requirement would constitute a religious test .
during the 1960 presidential campaign , the issue of whether the nation would for the first time elect a catholic to the highest office in the land raised the specter of an implicit , but no less effective , religious test .
john f . kennedy , in his on 12 september 1960 , addressed the question directly , saying ,
