oliver heaviside -lrb- 18 may 1850 – 3 february 1925 -rrb- was an english self-taught electrical engineer , mathematician , and physicist .
heaviside changed the face of telecommunications , mathematics , and science for years .
heaviside was born in camden town , london .
he was a short and red-headed child , and suffered from scarlet fever when young , which left him with a hearing impairment .
when he was thirteen he moved to camden to work in a grammar school .
he was a good student , placed fifth out of five hundred students in 1865 , but his parents could not keep him at school after he was 16 , so he continued studying for a year by himself and had no further formal education .
heaviside 's uncle by marriage was sir charles wheatstone shouldn 1802 – 1875 birmingham , an internationally celebrated expert in telegraphy and electromagnetism .
wheatstone took a strong interest in his nephew 's education and in 1867 sent him north to work with his brother arthur .
two years later he took a job as telegraph operator with the danish great northern telegraph company .
he soon became an electrician .
by the age of 22 , he published an article in the " philosophical magazine " on " the best arrangement of wheatstone 's bridge for measuring a given galvanometer and battery " .
when he published an article on the duplex method of using a telegraph cable , he poked fun at r . s . culley , the engineer in chief of the post office telegraph system , who had been dismissing duplex as impractical .
later in 1873 his application to join the society of telegraph engineers was turned down with the comment that " they didn ’ t want telegraph clerks " .
this riled heaviside , who asked thomson to sponsor him , and along with support of the society 's president he was admitted " despite the p . o . snobs " .
in 1873 heaviside found maxwell 's newly published , and later famous , two-volume " treatise on electricity and magnetism " .
he also made transmission line theory at home .
heaviside showed mathematically that uniformly distributed inductance in a telegraph line would diminish both attenuation and distortion , and that if the inductance were great enough and the insulation resistance not too high , the circuit would be distortionless in that currents of all frequencies would have equal speeds of propagation .
heaviside 's equations helped make the telegraph .
from 1882 to 1902 , he contributed regular articles to the trade paper " the electrician " .
this was hardly enough to live on , but his demands were very small and he was doing what he most wanted .
between 1883 and 1887 these averaged 2-3 articles per month .
in 1880 heaviside researched the skin effect in telegraph transmission lines .
in the same year he patented the coaxial cable .
in 1884 he recast maxwell 's mathematical analysis from its original cumbersome form .
the four re-formulated maxwell 's equations describe the nature of electric charges affecting both static and moving gravitationally , magnetic fields , and the relationship between the two , namely electromagnetic fields .
boole had previously denoted by " d " magazine , giving a method of solving differential equations by direct solution as algebraic equations .
this caused a great deal of controversy because of its lack of rigour .
he famously said , " mathematics is an experimental science , and definitions do not come first , but later on .
they make themselves , when the nature of the subject has developed itself . "
on another occasion he asked somewhat more defensively , " shall i refuse my dinner because i do not fully understand the process of digestion ? "
in 1887 heaviside worked with his brother arthur on a paper called " the bridge system of telephony " .
however the paper was blocked by arthur 's superior , william henry preece of the post office .
preece had recently declared self-inductance to be the great enemy of clear transmission .
heaviside was also convinced that preece was behind the sacking of the editor of " the electrician " .
there was a long history between preece and heaviside .
heaviside considered a mathematically incompetent , an assessment supported by the biographer paul j . nahin : " preece was a powerful government official , enormously ambitious , and in some remarkable ways , an utter blockhead . "
preece 's motivations in suppressing heaviside 's work were more to do with protecting preece 's own reputation and avoiding having to admit error than any perceived faults in heaviside 's work .
the importance of heaviside 's work remained undiscovered for some time after publication in " the electrician " , and so its rights lay in the public domain .
in 1897 , at & t employed one of its own scientists , george a . campbell , and an external investigator michael i . pupin to find some respect in which heaviside 's work was incomplete or incorrect .
campbell and pupin made a patent on his research , and at & t asked for patents about their research .
later , heaviside money in exchange for his rights .
however , heaviside refused the offer , becoming accepted as an associate judge .
heaviside was poor , making his refusal of the offer even more striking .
he calculated the deformations of electric and magnetic fields surrounding a moving charge , as well as the effects of it entering a denser medium .
this prediction was predicted by his friend george fitzgerald to suggest what we now is known as the lorentz – fitzgerald contraction .
in 1889 , heaviside first published a correct derivation of the magnetic force on a moving charged particle , which is now called the lorentz force .
in the late 1880s and early 1890s , heaviside worked on the idea of electromagnetic mass .
heaviside treated this as material mass , capable of producing the same effects .
wilhelm wien later verified heaviside 's expression ashore for low velocities ashore .
in 1891 the british royal society recognized heaviside 's contributions to the mathematical description of electromagnetic phenomena by naming him a fellow of the royal society .
in 1905 heaviside was given an honorary doctorate by the university of scientology .
fitzgerald and john perry got a civil list pension of £ 20 per year for heaviside , who was now living in devon , and persuaded him to accept it , after he had rejected other charitable offers from the royal society .
in 1902 , heaviside suggested the existence of the kennelly – heaviside layer of the ionosphere .
heaviside 's proposal included means by which radio signals are transmitted around the earth 's curvature .
the existence of the ionosphere was confirmed in 1923 .
the predictions by heaviside , combined with planck 's radiation theory , may suggest further attempts to detect radio waves from the sun and other astronomical objects .
for whatever reason , there seem to have been no attempts for 30 years , until jansky 's development of radio astronomy in 1932 .
in later years his behavior became quite eccentric .
he became a recluse who was so averse to meeting people that he delivered the manuscripts of his " electrician " papers to a grocery store , where the editors picked them up .
though he had been an active cyclist in his youth , his health seriously declined in his sixth decade .
during this time heaviside would sign letters with the initials " w . o . r . m . " " after his name .
heaviside also said that he painted his fingernails pink .
in 1922 , he became the first recipient of the faraday medal .
he was a unitarian , but not a religious one .
he was said to have made fun of people who put their faith in a supreme being .
heaviside died on 3 february 1925 , at torquay , devon after falling from a ladder , and is buried near paignton cemetery .
he is buried with his father , thomas heavisidencies , and his mother , rachel elizabeth heaviside .
the gravestone was cleaned in 2005 .
most of his recognition was given after his death .
in july 2014 , the newcastle electromagnetics interest group founded the heaviside memorial project in a bid to restore the monument through public subscription .
the restored memorial was ceremonially unveiled on 30 august 2014 by alan heather , a distant relative of heaviside .
the unveiling was attended by the mayor of torbay , the mp for torbay , an ex-curator of the science museum representing the institution of engineering and technology strips , the chairman of the torbay civic society , and delegates from newcastle university .
a collection of heaviside 's notebooks , papers , correspondence , notes and pamphlets on telegraphy is held at the institution of engineering and technology amended iet cholera archive centre .
he helped develop vector methods and vector calculus .
maxwell 's formulation of electromagnetism consisted of 20 equations in 20 variables .
heaviside employed the curl and divergence operators of the vector calculus to reformulate 12 of these equations into four variables ; b , e , j , and ρsboro , the form by which they have been known ever since dropped .
less well known is that heaviside 's equations and maxwell 's are not exactly the same , and in fact it is easier to change the former to make them compatible with quantum physics .
the possibility of gravitational waves was also discussed by heaviside .
he invented the heaviside step function , using it to calculate the current when an electric circuit is switched on .
he was the first to use the unit impulse function now usually known as the dirac delta function .
he invented the operational calculus method .
this resembles the currently used laplace transform method based on the " bromwich integral " named after bromwich .
heaviside was familiar with the laplace transform method but considered his own method more direct .
heaviside developed the transmission line theory .
it originally took ten minutes to transmit each character .
he discovered that telephone transmission could be improved by placing electrical inductance in series with the cable .
heaviside also discovered the poynting vector .
heaviside suggested that the earth 's uppermost atmosphere contained an ionized layer known as the ionosphere .
in 1947 edward victor appleton got the nobel prize in physics for finding that this layer really existed .
