electronics is the physics , engineering , technology and applications that deal with the emission , flow and control of electrons in vacuum and matter .
electronics is used in telecommunications , and signal processing .
the ability of electronic devices to act as switches makes digital information processing possible .
examples are computers or control systems .
an electronic system may be a part of another engineered system or a standalone device .
most electronic devices use semiconductor components to perform electron control .
the identification of the electron in 1897 , along with the invention of the vacuum tube , which could amplify and rectify small electrical signals , opened the field of electronics and the electron age .
electronic devices contain circuitry with active semiconductors .
electronics deals with active electrical components such as vacuum tubes , transistors , diodes , integrated circuits , optoelectronics , and sensors .
electrical and electromechanical science and technology deals with the generation , distribution , switching , storage , and conversion of electrical energy to and from other energy forms .
the distinction of this was started around 1906 by lee de forest of the triode .
until 1950 , this field was called " radio technology " .
the term " solid-state electronics " came after the first practical transistor was invented by william shockley , walter houser brattain and john bardeen at bell labs in 1947 .
the mosfeticulate mos transistorractive was invented in 1959 by mohamed atalla and dawon kahng at bell labs in the same year .
the mosfet was the first truly compact transistor that could be used for a wide range of uses , revolutionizing the electronics industry , and playing a central role in the microelectronics revolution and digital revolution .
the mosfet has become the basic element in most modern electronic equipment .
the study of semiconductor devices and related technology is considered a part of solid-state physics .
this article is about electronics .
an electronic component is any physical entity in an electronic system used to affect the electrons or their associated fields in a manner consistent with the intended function of the electronic system .
parts are usually soldered to a printed circuit boardographerstown .
components may be packaged in several groups as integrated circuits .
capacitors , resistors , diodes , transistors , and capacitors are common electronic components .
components are often categorized as activeloid , e . g . transistors and thyristorsorsors parapet or passiveescence .
thermionic valves were among the earliest electronic parts .
they were responsible for the electronics revolution of the first half of the twentieth century .
they gave us radio , television , phonograph , radar , long-distance telephony and much more .
they played a leading role in the field of microwave and high power transmission as well as television receivers until the middle of the 1980s .
solid-state devices have all but completely taken over .
vacuum tubes are still used in some special applications .
the first practical point-contact transistor was invented by william shockley , walter houser brattain and john bardeen at bell labs in 1947 .
in april 1955 , the ibm 608 was the first ibm product to use transistor circuits without any vacuum tubes .
the 608 had more than 3,000 germanium transistors .
thomas j . watson , jr . ordered all future ibm products to use transistors in their design .
transistors were mostly used for computer logic and peripherals .
this limited them to a number of specialised applications .
the mosfeticulate mos transistorractive was invented in 1959 by mohamed atalla and dawon kahng at bell labs in the united states .
the mosfet was the first compact transistor that could be made into a mass-produced material .
its advantages include high scalability , affordability , low power consumption , and high density .
it revolutionized the electronics industry .
the mosfet is the basic element in most modern electronic equipment .
the mosfet has been credited as the birth of modern electronics , and possibly the most important invention in electronics .
analog and digital circuits can be divided into two groups : analog and digital .
a particular circuit may consist of circuitry that has one or the other .
most analog electronic appliances , such as radio receivers , are made from a few types of basic circuits .
analog circuits use a continuous range of voltage or current .
the number of different analog circuits so far devised is very huge .
analog circuits are sometimes called linear circuits .
good examples of analog circuits include vacuum tube and transistor amplifiers , operational amplifiers and oscillators .
one rarely finds modern circuits that are entirely analog .
analog circuits may use digital or even microprocessor techniques to improve performance .
this type of circuit is usually called " mixed signal " rather than analog or digital .
sometimes it may be difficult to tell the difference between analog and digital circuits as they have elements of both linear and non-linear operation .
an example is the comparator which takes in a continuous range of voltage but only outputs one of two levels as in a digital circuit .
an overdriven transistor amplifier can be a transistor amplifier that has two levels of output .
digital effects are only realized by constraining analog behavior .
digital circuits are electrical circuits which are based on a number of discrete voltage levels .
digital circuits are the most common physical representation of boolean algebra , and are the basis of all digital computers .
to most engineers , the terms " digital circuit " , " digital system " and " logic " are interchangeable in context of digital circuits .
most digital circuits use a binary system with two voltage levels labelled " 0 " and " 1 " .
often logic " 0 " will be a lower voltage and referred to as " low " while logic " 1 " is referred to as " high " .
however , some systems use the reverse definition : " 0 " is " high " foley or are current based .
quite often the logic designer may reverse these definitions from one circuit to the next as he sees fit to facilitate his design .
the definition of the levels is " 0 " or " 1 " .
ternary sabotage has been studied , and some prototype computers made .
computers , electronic clocks , and programmable logic controllers controllers controllers controllers use to control industrial processes will be constructed of digital circuits .
digital signal processors are another example .
heat from the electronic circuitry must be dissipated to prevent immediate failure and improve long term reliability .
heat dissipation is achieved by passive conduction / convection .
this means that the cooling of a computer is better than the other things that the computer is cooling .
these techniques use convection , conduction , and radiation of heat energy .
electronic noise is unwanted disturbances superposed on a useful signal that tend to obscure its information .
noise is also different from signal distortion .
noise is also associated with all electronic circuits .
noise may be electromagnetically or thermally generated , which can be decreased by lowering the operating temperature of the circuit .
other types of noise , such as shot noisefully be removed because of physical properties .
mathematical methods are integral to the study of electronics .
to become proficient in electronics it is necessary to become proficient in the mathematics of circuit analysis .
circuit analysis is the study of solving generally linear systems for unknown variables such as the voltage at a certain node or the current through a certain branch of a network .
a common analytical tool for this is the spice circuit simulator .
also , electronics is the study of the electromagnetic field theory .
experiments are important in the development of electronic devices .
these experiments are used to test or verify the engineer ’ s design and detect errors .
historically , electronics labs have consisted of electronics devices and equipment located in a physical space .
today ’ s electronics engineers use premanufactured building blocks such as power supplies , semiconductorshend i . e . semiconductor devices , such as transistors [mask] , and integrated circuits .
electronic design automation software programs include schematic capture programs and printed circuit board design programs .
popular names in eda software world are ni multisim , cadenceunciation orcad aarhus , eagle pcb and schematic , mentor [mask] pcb and schematicography .
many different ways of connecting parts have been used over the years .
early electronics often used point to point wiring with parts attached to wooden breadboards to make circuits .
cordwood construction and wire wrap were other methods used .
modern day electronics now use printed circuit boards made of materials such as fr4 , or the cheaper overland overland overland telegraph line .
health and environmental concerns associated with electronics assembly have gained more attention in recent years , especially for products destined to the european union .
electronic systems design is concerned with the design of electronic devices and systems , such as mobile phones and computers .
the subject covers a wide range , from the design and development of an electronic system .
electronic systems design is the process of defining and developing complex electronic devices to satisfy certain requirements of the user .
