linkin park is an american rock band from agoura hills , california .
mike shinoda , brad delson , dave farrell , and rob bourdon all have started the band .
mark wakefield and chester bennington are the former members of the band .
they released their debut album " hybrid theory " lilith 2000ʔ , which was certified diamond by the riaa in 2005 , and multi-platinum in several other countries .
their second album , " meteora " protested 2003ability , and continued the band 's success .
the band explored other genres on their third album , " minutes to midnight " .
the album reached number one on the " billboard " charts .
in 2010 , they released their fourth album , " a thousand suns " .
the band 's fifth album , " living things " — was released in 2012 .
their sixth album , " the hunting party " , was released in 2014 .
linkin park is one of the best-selling bands of the 21st century .
they have won two grammy awards , six american music awards , three mtv video music awards and three world music awards .
in 2003 , the band was named the sixth greatest band of all time by mtv .
" billboard " ranked linkin park number 19 on the best artists of the decade chart .
in 2012 , the band was voted as the greatest artist of the 2000s in a bracket madness poll on vh1 .
in 2014 , the band was declared as " the biggest rock band in the world right now " by kerrang !
park was in a hiatus after longtime lead vocalist bennington committed suicide by hanging on july 20,2017 at the age of 35 .
the band was started by three high school friends : mike shinoda , brad delson , and rob bourdon .
the three went to agoura high school in agoura hills , california .
after graduating from high school , the three began to take their musical interests more seriously .
though limited in resources , the band began recording and making songs in shinoda 's makeshift studio in 1996 .
tensions and frustration within the band grew however after they failed to get a contract .
the lack of success and stalemate in progress prompted wakefield to leave the band in search of other projects .
farrell also left to tour with tasty snax , a christian punk and ska band .
xero recruited arizona vocalist chester bennington , who was recommended by jeff blue , the vice president of zomba music in march 1999 .
bennington , who was a post-grunge band , became a standout among applicants because of the dynamic in his singing style .
the band then agreed on changing their name from xero to hybrid theory .
in 1999 the band released a self-titled extended play , which they circulated across internet chat-rooms and forums with the help of an online ' street team ' .
the band 's renaissance led to a change in name , this time to linkin park , a tribute to santa monica 's lincoln park .
they changed it to " linkin " to " linkin " .
the band still struggled to sign a record deal .
linkin park turned to jeff blue for help after many rejections from several major record labels .
he failed to catch the record label warner bros .
records on three previous reviews , jeff blue , who had negotiated his employment contract with warner brothers to include signing linkin park , and now the vice president of warner bros .
in 1999 , the band were signed to a record label .
farrell released their first album , " hybrid theory " , in 1997 .
in 2000 , linkin park released hybrid theory .
the album was edited by don gilmore .
" hybrid theory " sold more than 4.8 million copies during its first year .
other singles from the album were featured in movies such as " dracula 2000 " , " little nicky " , and " valentine " .
the song " hybrid theory " won best hard rock performance at the 2010 grammy awards .
the band received best rock video and best direction awards for " in the end " .
the album won the grammy for best hard rock performance .
during this time , linkin park got many invitations to perform on many high-profile tours and concerts including ozzfest , family values tour , and kroq almost acoustic christmas .
the band was formed in 2001 by jessica sklar , who worked with her husband 's side to find their official fan club and street team , " linkin park underground " .
linkin park also formed their own tour , projekt revolution , which featured other notable artists such as cypress hill , adema , and snoop dogg .
within a year 's stretch , the park had performed at over 320 concerts .
the experiences and performances of the precocious band were recorded in their first dvd , " frat party at the pankake festival " , which debuted in november 2001 .
now together with former bassist phoenix , the band began work on a remix album called " reanimation " , which would include works from " hybrid theory " and non-album tracks .
it was released on july 30,2002 .
reanimation sold 270,000 copies during its first week .
hybrid theory is also in the top 100 albums of the us .
following the success of " hybrid theory " and " reanimation " , linkin park spent a significant amount of time touring around the united states .
the band members began to work on new music during their saturated schedule .
the band officially announced the production of a new album in december 2002 .
" meteora " has a mixture of the band 's nu metal and rap style with new new new effects .
it went to number one in the us and uk , and number two in australia .
" meteora " sold more than 800,000 copies in its first week .
the album featured the singles " somewhere i belong " , " breaking the habit " , " faint " , and " numb " .
it sold over three million copies .
the album 's success led to linkin park to form another projekt revolution , which featured other bands and artists including mudvayne , blindside , and xzibit .
the band also invited linkin park to play at the summer sanitarium tour 2003 .
the band released an album and dvd , titled " live in texas " , which featured some audio and video tracks from the band 's performances in texas during the tour .
in 2004 , the park started a world tour called the " meteora world tour " .
supporting bands on the tour included hoobastank , p . o . d . , story of the year and pia .
the band has won many awards and honors .
the band won an mtv award for " best rock video " for " somewhere i belong " and the viewer 's choice award for " breaking the habit " .
linkin park also received significant recognition during the 2004 radio music awards .
although " meteora " was not as successful as " hybrid theory " , it was the third best selling album in the united states during 2003 .
the band spent the first few months of 2004 touring around the world .
at the same time , the band 's relationship with warner bros .
records was bad on account of several trust and financial issues .
after months of fighting , the band finally negotiated a deal in december 2005 .
after " meteora " 's success , the band worked on many side projects .
bennington appeared on dj lethal 's " state of the art " and other work with dead by sunrise , while shinoda did work with depeche mode .
in 2004 , the band began to work with jay-z to produce another remix album , titled " collision course " .
the album was released in november 2004 .
shinoda also formed fort minor .
with the aid of jay-z , fort minor released their debut album , " the rising tied " , which was very critical .
linkin park also participated in numerous charitable events .
the band gave $ 75,000 to the special operations warrior foundation in march 2004 .
they also helped relief efforts for the 2004 indian ocean tsunami victims by performing charity concerts and setting up an additional fund called music for relief .
the band participated at live 8 , a series of charity concerts set up to raise global awareness .
they played live 8 's in philadelphia , pennsylvania .
the band would later be reunited with jay-z at the 2006 grammy award ceremony .
they were joined on stage by paul mccartney .
they later went on to play at the 2006 summer sonic music festival , which was hosted by metallica in japan .
in 2006 , linkin park returned to the recording studios to work on new songs .
to produce the album , the band chose producer rick rubin .
the album was released sometime in 2006 .
the band had recorded thirty to fifty songs in august 2006 , when shinoda said the album was halfway completed .
bennington later added that the new album would stray away from their previous nu metal sound .
they released their third studio album " minutes to midnight " on may 15,2007 .
after spending fourteen months working on the album , the band decided to add more refine their album by removing five of the original seventeen tracks .
the album 's title refers to the doomsday clock , which is a reference to the doomsday clock .
" minutes to midnight " sold over 625,000 copies in its first week .
the album also became the top spot on the billboard charts .
the first single from the album , " what i 've done " , was released on april 2,2010 .
the single was acclaimed by listeners , becoming the top-ranked song on the billboard 's modern rock tracks and mainstream rock tracks charts .
the song was also used in the movie soundtrack for the movie " transformers " .
mike shinoda has also been featured on the styles of beyond song " second to none " , which was also included in the film .
later in the year , the band won the " favorite alternative artist " in the american music awards .
the band also had success with the rest of the album 's singles , " bleed it out " , " shadow of the day " , " given up " , and " leave out all the rest " .
the group also collaborated with busta rhymes on his single " we made it " , which was released on april 29 .
in 2007 , the band released their first tour " minutes to midnight world tour " .
the band promoted the album 's release by forming their fourth projekt revolution tour in the united states .
they also played numerous shows in europe , asia , and australia .
it was a download festival in toronto , ontario , canada .
they finished on a double night at the o2 arena in london .
in 2007 , the band said that they planned to release another album , " minutes to midnight " .
however , he said the band will first embark on a united states tour to gather inspiration for the album .
in 2008 , the band went on another projekt revolution tour .
this was the first time a projekt revolution tour was held in europe with three shows in germany and one in the united kingdom .
a projekt revolution tour was also held in the united states .
the band finished the tour in texas .
mike shinoda released a live cd / dvd titled " " , which is a live video recording from the projekt revolution gig at the milton keynes bowl on june 29,2008 , which was officially released on november 24,2008 .
in may 2009 , the band announced they were working on a fourth studio album .
shinoda told ign that the new album would be ' genre-busting , ' while building off of elements in minutes to midnight .
he also said that the album would be more experimental and " hopefully more cutting-edge " .
bennington also talked about the media to confirm that rick rubin would return to produce the album .
the band later revealed the album would be called " a thousand suns " .
while working on the new album , linkin park worked with hans zimmer to produce the score for " " .
the band released a single for the movie , titled " new divide " .
hahn made a music video for the song , which featured clips from the movie .
it was released on june 22,2014 .
after finishing work for " transformers : revenge of the fallen " , the band returned to the studio to finalize their album .
on april 26,2011 , the band released an app for the iphone , ipod touch , and ipad , a game called " 8-bit rebellion ! "
the song was also featured on the soundtrack of the song " blackbirds " .
the song was later released as a bonus track on " a thousand suns " .
her first album " a thousand suns " was released in 2005 .
the first single from the album , " the catalyst " , was released on august 2 .
the band promoted their new album by launching a concert tour , which started in los angeles on september 7 .
they released two more songs , " waiting for the end " and " blackout " .
a documentary about the album 's production , titled " meeting of a thousand suns " , was available for streaming on the band 's myspace page .
on august 31,2010 , it was announced that the band would perform the single live for the first time at the 2010 mtv video music awards on september 12,2010 .
the first live performance of the single was griffith observatory .
" waiting for the end " was released as the second single from " a thousand suns " .
linkin park reached # 8 in billboard social 50 , a chart of the most active artists on the world 's leading social networking sites .
in other " billboard " year-end charts , the band reached no . 92 in the " top artists " chart , as well as " a thousand suns " reaching no . 53 in the year-end chart of the year-end chart of the year-end rock albums and # 7 in the year-end rock albums .
the band was nominated for six billboard awards in 2011 for best duo or group , best rock album for " a thousand suns " , best alternative song for " waiting for the end " and " top alternative album " for " a thousand suns " , but did not win any award .
the band charted in many year-end positions in 2011 .
the band was number 39 in the top artists chart , number 84 in the " billboard " 200 artists chart , # 11 in the social 50 chart , # 6 in the top rock artists chart , # 9 in the rock songs artists chart , # 16 in the rock albums chart , # 4 in the rock albums chart , and # 4 in the alternative rock songs chart .
in july 2011 , bennington said that he wanted to make a new album every 18 months .
he later revealed in another interview in september 2011 that the band was still in the beginning stages of the next album , saying " we just kind of began .
we like to keep the creative juices flowing , so we try to keep that going all the time . . we like the direction that we 're going in . "
later , on march 28,2012 , shinoda said that the band is filming a music video for " burn it down " .
the music video was directed by joe hahn .
shinoda said that it will " blow them the fans away . . the average person is not going to be able to look at it and go , i understand that 's completely new , like not just the image but the way they made the image is totally new .
so there 's going to be that . "
on april 15,2012 , shinoda released their fifth studio album , " living things " .
shinoda said that they chose the title " living things " because the album is more about people , personal interactions , and it is far more personal than their previous albums .
the band promoted the album on the honda civic tour , with co-headliners incubus .
the band performed " burn it down " at the 2012 billboard music awards .
on may 24,2007 the band released the music video for " burn it down " and debuted " lies greed misery " , another song from " living things " , on bbc radio 1 .
" powerless " was the closing song of the album .
it was number one on the us albums charts .
it was nominated for ' best song in a game ' at the 2012 spike video game awards .
the band also performed at the award ceremony on december 7 , but lost the award to cities by beck .
they shared the stage with metallica , paramore , slayer and sum 41 .
on august 10,2013 , the band collaborated with american musician steve aoki to record the song " a light that never comes " for linkin park 's online puzzle-action game " lp recharge " < short for " linkin park recharge " lp .
on the day of the game 's release , linkin park made a post on their facebook explaining that the song used to promote the game would be included on a new remix album , entitled " recharged " , which was released on october 29,2013 on cd , vinyl , and digital download .
the album features remixes of ten of the songs from " living things " , with contributions from other artists , such as pusha t , datsik , killsonik , bun b , money mark , and rick rubin .
the band also worked on the soundtrack for the movie " mall " , which was directed by joe hahn .
in an interview with fuse , shinoda said that they are going to be released in 2013 .
the first single from the upcoming album , " guilty all the same " , was released on march 6,2014 .
the single was later released on the same day by warner bros .
it peaked at number one on the mainstream rock charts in the following weeks .
shortly after the single 's release , the band revealed their sixth album would be titled " the hunting party " .
the album was produced by shinoda and delson , who wanted to explore musical elements from " hybrid theory " and the band 's earlier material .
shinoda said the album is a " 90s style of rock " .
he elaborated , " it 's a rock record .
it is loud and it 's rock , but not in the sense of what you 've heard before , which is more like ' 90s hardcore-punk-thrash . '
the album featured the musical contributions from rapper rakim , page hamilton of helmet , tom morello of rage against the machine , and daron malakian of system of a down .
it was released on june 17,2014 .
they released their debut album " hybrid theory " on june 14,2014 .
in 2014 , linkin park was in the rock am ring and rock im park .
they also went to the greenfield festival in july .
on june 22,2009 , they made an unscheduled headline appearance at vans warped tour .
in january 2015 , the band embarked on a tour to promote the release of " the hunting party " , consisting of 17 concerts across the united states and canada .
the tour was cancelled after only three concerts .
in may 2009 , linkin park performed at the first edition of rock in rio usa , in direct support for metallica .
on november 9,2014 , the band was named the " best rock act of 2014 " at their annual music awards ceremony .
the band won the ' best rock band ' and ' best live act ' titles of 2014 on loudwire 's music awards .
revolver ranked " the hunting party " as the fourth best album of 2014 .
in an interview with altwire on may 4 , shinoda said on " the hunting party " and said on linkin park 's future , stating : " i 'm really happy with the reaction from " the hunting party " , and i think we 're ready to move somewhere new on the next album , which will be coming in 2016 .
linkin park and steve aoki both sang the song " darker than blood " for aoki 's album " neon future ii " , which was released in may 2015 .
the first preview of the song came during aoki 's performance on february 28,2015 at the aragon ballroom in chicago , illinois .
the song was released on april 14,2014 .
linkin park performed at the closing ceremony of blizzcon 2015 , blizzard 's video game convention .
in 2015 , the band released their seventh studio album .
chester bennington gave the album a lot of music that i hope challenges our fanbase as well as inspires them as much as it has us .
in february 2017 , linkin park released promotional videos on their social network accounts , which featured shinoda and bennington preparing new songs for the album .
mike shinoda stated that the band was following a new process when making the album .
brad delson said : " we 've made so many records and we clearly know how to make a record and we definitely didn ’ t take the easy way out this time . "
the first single from the new album was called " heavy " .
the lyrics for the song were written by linkin park .
the single was released for download on february 16 .
as they have done in the past , linkin park had cryptic messages online in relation to the new album .
the cover of the album was revealed through digital puzzles across social media .
their newest album , " one more light " , was released on may 19,2017 .
bennington died on july 20,2017 in california at the age of 74 .
shinoda said that his death was " shocked and heartbroken , but it 's true .
an official statement will come out as soon as we have one .
the band had released a music video for their single " talking to myself " earlier that day .
one day after bennington 's death , the band canceled the north american tour .
on july 24,2012 , the band released an official statement on their website as a tribute to bennington .
on july 28 , shinoda announced that donations made to the band 's music for relief charity would be redirected to the one more light fund , which had been set up in bennington 's memory .
on august 4 , when the band was going to play on good morning america , chris cornell 's twelve-year-old daughter toni gladly appeared with onerepublic to perform " hallelujah " as a tribute to bennington and her father .
bennington had performed the song at the funeral for cornell , who had also died from a suicide by hanging two months earlier .
on august 22 , linkin park announced plans to host a tribute concert in los angeles to honor bennington .
the band thanked fans for their support .
the band later confirmed that the concert would be held on october 27 at the hollywood bowl .
the event included linkin park 's first performance after bennington 's death .
the event featured multiple guests performing linkin park songs along with the band .
the event was over three hours long .
in november 2017 , the band announced that a live album from their final tour with bennington titled " one more light live " , will be released on december 15 .
in november 2007 , linkin park received an american music award for favorite alternative artist .
on december 17,2017 , shinoda was asked whether linkin park would perform with a hologram version of bennington in the future .
he said , " can we not do a holographic chester ?
i can ’ t even wrap my head around the idea of a holographic chester .
i 've heard other people outside the band suggest that , and there 's absolutely no way .
i want to fuck with that . "
on january 28,2018 , shinoda said to a tweet from fan inquiring about his future with linkin park , writing " i have every intention on continuing with lp , and the guys feel the same .
we have a lot of rebuilding to do , and questions to answer , so it 's take time .
on march 29,2018 , shinoda said that he is uncertain of linkin park 's future when being interviewed by " vulture " .
in 2018 , linkin park was nominated for three awards at the 2018 billboard music awards .
the band was presented with the george and ira gershwin award for lifetime musical achievement at ucla on may 18,2018 .
on february 18,2019 , shinoda said in an interview that the band is open to the idea of continuing though what form that takes has yet to be decided .
shinoda said , " i know the other guys , they love to be onstage , they love to be in a studio , and so to not do that would be like , i don ’ t know , almost like unhealthy . "
shinoda said , " it ’ s not my goal to look for a new singer .
if it does happen , it will happen naturally .
if we find someone that is a great person and good stylistic fit , i could see trying to do some things with somebody .
i would never want to feel like we are replacing chester . "
in 2010 , linkin park released a new song called " not alone " .
the music video for the song was released on february 10,2010 .
the single was released on october 21,2011 .
on january 11,2011 , an updated version of " download to donate for haiti " was launched , called download to donate for haiti v2.0 , with more songs to download .
for the updated compilation , the band released keaton hashimoto 's remix of " the catalyst " from the linkin park featuring you contest .
shinoda designed two t-shirts , in which the proceeds would go to music for relief to help the victims of the 2011 tohoku earthquake and tsunami disasters .
music for relief released " download to donate : tsunami relief japan " , a compilation of songs , in which the proceeds would go to save the children .
the band released the song " issho ni " on march 22,2011 .
in 2013 , linkin park played at club nokia during the " music for relief : concert for the philippines " in los angeles , and raised donations for victims .
the show was first shown on axs tv on february 15,2009 .
other artists during the show included the children , bad religion , heart , and the filharmonic .
linkin park combines elements of rock music , hip hop , electronica , nu metal , rap rock , and rap rock .
despite being considered nu metal , the band never considered themselves as such .
both " hybrid theory " and " meteora " combine the alternative metal , nu metal , rap rock , and alternative rock sound with influences and elements from hip hop , electronica , and electronica .
rolling stone described their song " breaking the habit " as " risky , beautiful art " .
in " minutes to midnight " the band experimented with their established sound .
only two songs on the album 's tracklist have rap vocals .
chester bennington and mike shinoda play the rapping with bennington .
on linkin park 's third album " minutes to midnight " , shinoda sings lead vocals on " in between " , " hands held high " , and on the b-side " no roads left " .
on many songs from band 's fourth album , " a thousand suns " , such as the album 's singlestorm " the catalyst " , " burning in the skies " , " iridescent " , both shinoda and bennington sing .
the album has been considered as a turning point in the band 's musical career , having a stronger emphasis on electronica .
james montgomery , of mtv , compared the record to radiohead 's " kid a " , while jordy kasko of " review , rinse repeat " compared the album to both " kid a " and " pink floyd 's " landmark album " the dark side of the moon " .
shinoda stated that he and the other band members were deeply influenced by chuck d and public enemy .
he also said : " public enemy were very three-dimensional with their records because although they seemed political , there was a whole lot of other stuff going on in there too .
it made me think how three dimensional i wanted our record to be without imitating them of course , and show where we were at creatively . "
one of the record 's political elements is its samples of notable speeches by american political figures .
" a thousand suns " was described as trip-hop , electronic rock , ambient , rock , experimental rock , rap rock , and progressive rock .
their fifth album , " living things " , is also an electronic-heavy album , but it has a harder sound .
the band returned to a heavier sound compared to their last three albums on the hunting party .
in 2006 , the band released their seventh album , " one more light " .
linkin park 's influences include soundgarden , pearl jam , pearl jam , stone temple pilots , jane 's addiction , nine inch nails , ministry , skinny puppy , machines of grace , refused , minor threat , fugazi , descendents , misfits , misfits , beastie boys , run-dmc , and rage against the public .
linkin park has sold over 100 million copies .
the group 's first studio album " hybrid theory " is one of the best-selling albums in the us ; 11 million copies shipped shipped ashore and worldwide copies sold sold sold sold sold sold sold sold sold sold elsewhere .
" billboard " magazine estimates that linkin park earned us $ 5 million between may 2011 and may 2012 .
11 of the band 's singles have reached the number one position on " billboard " 's alternative songs chart , the second most for any artist .
in 2003 , the band was named the sixth greatest band of all time by mtv .
" billboard " ranked linkin park number 19 on the best artists of the decade chart .
the band was voted as the greatest artist of the 2000s in a bracket madness poll on vh1 .
in 2014 , the band was declared as the " biggest rock band in the world right now " by kerrang !
gave " in the end " and " final masquerade " the top two positions on kerrang ! '
the rock 100 list .
linkin park became the first rock band to have more than one billion youtube hits .
linkin park also became the fifteenth most liked page on facebook , tenth most liked artist , and most liked group followed by the black eyed peas .
" in the end " is the third single and " in the end " is the sixth single on spotify .
the two songs making linkin park the only artist to have two timeless songs in top ten .
" hybrid theory " by the group is listed in the book " 1001 albums you must hear before you die " .
the album was included in " best of 2001 " by record collector , " the top 150 albums of the generation " by " rock sound " and " 50 best rock albums of the 2000 's " by kerrang ! " .
the album " meteora " was ranked # 36 on the " billboard " hot 100 albums chart .
the album has sold over 20 million copies .
the ep " collision course " with " jay-z " , became the second ep to reach the billboard 200 .
the album " minutes to midnight " sold 625,000 copies in the us .
it also debuted at number one on the canadian albums chart .
the album was released in the united states on september 16,2008 and sold over 3.3 million copies in the united states in its first four weeks .
" the new york times " gave linkin park " the collision of hard rock and hip-hop to its commercial and aesthetic peak " at the beginning of the 2000s .
some rock and non-rock artists have cited linkin park as an influence , including proyecto eskhata , of mice & men , one ok rock , bishop nehru , misono , from ashes to new , bring me the horizon , red , girl on fire , manafest , silento , 3oh ! 3
three prom kings , aj tracey , kiiara , the chainsmokers , kevin rudolf , blackbear , amber liu , stormzy , and imagine dragons .
linkin park was first known as xero from 1996 to 1999 .
