in greek mythology , pandoraylus called the " all-gifted " , which means " all-gifted " .
all the gods helped by giving her gifts .
her other name is anesidora , " she who sends up gifts " upwards " implying " from below " within the earth .
the pandora myth is a kind of theodicy .
according to this , pandora opened a jartively " pithos " prefecture , in modern accounts sometimes mistranslated as " pandora 's box " , releasing all the evils of humanity .
hesiod 's interpretation of pandora 's story , sometimes considered misogynous , went on to influence both jewish and christian theology and so perpetuated her bad reputation into the renaissance .
later poets , dramatists , painters and sculptors made her their subject .
hesiod , both in his " theogony " briefly , without naming pandora outright , line 570dilly and in " works and days " , gives the earliest version of the story .
the pandora myth first appears in lines 560 – 612 of hesiod 's poem in epic meter , the " theogony " aarhus ; c . 8th – 7th centuries bc ; without ever giving the woman a name .
prometheus then decides to give humanity a punishing gift to compensate for the gift that they had been given .
he commands hephaestus to make the first woman from earth .
athena dresses her in a silvery gown , an embroidered veil , garlands and an ornate crown of silver .
this woman is unnamed in the " theogony " , but is probably pandora .
when she first appears before gods and mortals , " wonder seized them " as they looked upon her .
but she was " sheer guile , not to be withstood by men . "
from her is the race of women and female kind .
he reaches deadly old age without anyone to tend his years .
hesiod says that occasionally a man finds a good wife , but still shorter than 609 millimetres " evil contends with good . "
the more famous version of the myth comes from another of hesiod 's works , " works and days " .
he also makes the scope of the misery she inflicts on humanity .
as before , she is created by hephaestus , but now more gods contribute to her completionitions : athena taught her needlework and weaving ; aphrodite " shed grace upon her head and cruel longing and cares that weary the limbs " adorned with hermes , and thus gave her a speech adorned with the beauty of the gods .
finally , hermes gives this woman a name : pandora-" all-gifted "-.
pandora means " all-giving " in greek .
the implications of this mistranslation are explored in " all-giving pandora : mythic inversion ? "
in this retelling of her story , pandora 's deceitful feminine nature becomes the least of humanity 's worries .
she brings with her a jaroslav -lrb- which , due to textual corruption in the sixteenth century -rrb- came to be called a box litter containing " burdensome toil and sickness that brings death to men " ; diseases ; 1020 – 2eux ; and " a myriad other pains " ; and " a myriad other pains " ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ;
prometheus had ( fearing further reprisals lilith warned his brother epimetheus not to accept any gifts from zeus .
but epimetheus did not listen ; he accepted pandora , who promptly scattered the contents of her jar .
hesiod tells us , " the earth and sea are full of evils " .
one item , however , did not escape the jaroslav 96 – 9ciful : only hope was left within her unbreakable house , she remained under the lip of the jar , and did not fly away .
before she could , pandora had to replace the jar .
this was the will of zeus the cloudgatherer .
hesiod does not say why hopetagram " elpis " remained in the jar .
and closes with the moralized moralise 105 km : " thus it is not possible to escape the mind of zeus . "
hesiod also outlines how the end of man 's golden age gave an all-male society of immortals who were reverent to the gods , worked hard , and ate from abundant groves of fruit syracuse was brought on by prometheus .
zeus punished the technologically advanced society by creating a woman .
thus , pandora was created and given the jar vidhan mistranslated as ' box ' ... which releases all evils upon man .
archaic and classic greek literature are not mention of pandora , but mythographers later filled in minor details or added postscripts to hesiod 's account .
for example , the " bibliotheca " and hyginus each make clear what might be latent in the hesiod text : epimetheus married pandora .
they each add that the couple had a daughter , pyrrha , who married deucalion and survived the deluge with him .
the " catalogue of women " , had made a " pandora " one of the daughters of deucalion , and the mother of graecus by zeus .
annius da viterbo , a monk from the 15th century , said that the story was made to be a source of pagan and scriptural narrative .
the humanist erasmus of rotterdam translated hesiod from greek to latin , and translated the tale of pandora into latin .
hesiod 's " pithos " refers to a large jar that is used for farming .
it can also refer to a funerary jar .
erasmus translated " pithos " into the latin word " pyxis " , meaning " box " .
the phrase " pandora 's box " has been used for many years .
historic interpretations of the pandora figure are rich enough to have offered dora and erwin panofsky scope for monographic treatment .
m . l . west also writes that the story of pandora and her jar is from a pre-hesiodic myth .
he also cites the ancient hesiod " catalogue of women " as preserving this older tradition , and that the jar may have at one point contained only good things for humanity .
he also writes that it may have been that epimetheus and pandora and their roles were transposed in the pre-hesiodic myths , a " mythic inversion " .
he remarks that there is a curious connection between pandora being made out of earth in hesiod 's story , to what is in the " bibliotheca " that prometheus created man from water and earth .
hesiod 's myth of pandora 's jar , then , could be an summary of many different early myths .
pandora 's name was given in " works and days " .
pandora means " all-gifted " .
some vase paintings from the 5th century bc likewise indicate that the pre-hesiodic myth of the goddess pandora lasted for centuries after the time of hesiod .
an alternate name for pandora was found on a white-ground kylixometer , ca . 460 bc c1 c14 bc inclination , which means " she who sends up gifts . "
this vase painting clearly shows hephaestus and athena putting the finishing touches on the first woman , as in the " theogony " .
written above this figureocks , a convention in greek vase paintinglogists is the name " anesidora " .
more commonly , however , the epithet " anesidora " is used for gaea or demeter .
william e . phipps has pointed out , " classics scholars suggest that hesiod reversed the meaning of the name of an earth goddess called pandorastrels all-giving upwards or anesidora sends gifts gifts .
vase paintings and literary texts show that pandora was a mother earth figure who was worshipped by some greeks .
the main english commentary on " works and days " states that hesiod shows no awareness of this .
jane ellen harrison also turned to the repertory of vase-painters to shed light on aspects of myth that were left unaddressed or disguised in literature .
her fig . 71 foley the half-figure of pandora emerges from the ground , her arms upraised in the epiphany gesture , to greet epimetheus .
a winged " ker " with a fillet hovers overhead : " pandora rises from the earth ; she " is " the earth , giver of all gifts " .
over time , the " all-giving " goddess somehow got into an " all-gifted " mortal woman .
a . h . smith , however , noted that in hesiod 's account athena and the seasons brought wreaths of grass and spring flowers to pandora , indicating that hesiod was conscious of pandora 's original " all-giving " function .
for harrison , hesiod 's story suggests " evidence of a shift from matriarchy to patriarchy in greek culture .
as the life-bringing goddess pandora is eclipsed , the death-bringing human pandora arises .
she concludes that her great figure is strangely changed and diminished .
she is no longer earth-born , but the creature , the handiwork of zeus .
robert graves , quoting harrison , asserts that " pandora is not a genuine myth , but an anti-feminist fable , probably of his own invention . "
h . j . rose , the myth of pandora is somewhat more illiberal than that of epic .
the hesiodic myth did not completely completely obliterate the memory of the all-giving goddess pandora .
a scholium to line 971 of aristophanes ' " the birds " mentions a cult " to pandora , the earth , because she bestows all things necessary for life " .
and in fifth-century athens , pandora made a prominent appearance in what , at first , appears an unexpected context , in a marble relief or bronze appliques as a frieze along the base of the " athena parthenos " , the culminating experience on the acropolis .
jeffrey m . hurwit has said that she was an " anti-athena . "
athena was the " highly gendered social and political realities of fifth-century athens " .
meanwhile , pausaniastite i . 24.7 ) merely noted the subject and moved on .
images of pandora began to appear on greek pottery as early as the 5th century bc , although identification of the scene represented is sometimes unknown .
an independent tradition that does not square with any of the classical literary sources is in the visual repertory of attic red-figure vase-painters .
sometimes , but not always , she is labeled " pandora " .
in some cases the figure of pandora emerging from the earth is surrounded by figures carrying hammers in what has been suggested as a scene from a satyr play by sophocles , " pandora , or the hammerers " , of which only fragments remain .
there have been different interpretations of such scenes .
in a late pre-raphaelite painting by john d . batten , hammer wielding workmen appear through a doorway , while in the foreground hephaestus broods on the as yet unanimated figure of “ pandora ” .
there were also earlier english paintings of the newly created pandora as surrounded by the heavenly gods presenting gifts .
in one case it was painted on the ceiling at petworth house by louis laguerre in about 1720 .
william etty 's " pandora crowned by the seasons " of a century later is similarly presented as an apotheosis taking place among the clouds .
in between these two had come james barry ’ s huge " birth of pandora " , on which he worked for over a decade at the turn of the nineteenth century .
well before that , he was working on the design .
an early drawing , only preserved now in the print made of it by luigi schiavonetti , shows pandora being adorned by the gods and the hours while the gods look on .
its ideological purpose was to demonstrate an equal society unified by the harmonious function of those within it .
but in the actual painting which followed much later , a subordinated pandora is surrounded by gift-bearing gods and minerva stands near her .
the shift is back to the culture of blame when she steps outside it .
her idealisation is as a dangerous type of beauty , generally naked or semi-naked .
she is only differentiated from other paintings or statues of such females .
there are examples in sculptures by henri-joseph ruxthielttered 1819 pianosimovimovimovimovimovimovimov .
pandora was a theological commonplace going back to the early church fathers that the myth of pandora made her a type of eve .
each is the first woman in the world .
it has been argued that it was a result of the hellenisation of western asia that the misogyny in hesiod 's account of pandora began openly to influence both jewish and christian interpretations of scripture .
the doctrinal bias against women started then into renaissance times .
bishop jean olivier 's long latin poem " pandora " drew on the classical account as well as the biblical to show that woman is the means of drawing men to sin .
it was published in 1541 and republished in 1549 .
in the same period , there was a tragedy by leonhard culmann , a protestant theologian .
the equation of the two also occurs in the 1550 allegorical painting by jean cousin the elder , eva prima pandora osaka prefecture eve the first pandora ɔ , in which a naked woman reclines in a grotto .
her right elbow rests on a skull , indicating the bringing of death , and she holds an apple branch in that hand – both attributes of eve .
her left arm is wreathed by a snake wreath .
above hangs the sign from which the painting gets its name and beneath it is a closed jar , perhaps the counterpart of the other in olympus , containing blessings .
in juan de horozco 's emblem book , " emblemas morales " protested 1589 c1 , a motive is given for pandora 's action .
she also said that she is a part of a commentary that condemns female curiosity and the desire to learn by which the very first woman was deceived .
in the later century , desire to learn was equated with the female demand to share the male prerogative of education .
in nicolas regnier ’ s painting “ the allegory of vanity ” , subtitled “ pandora ” , it is typified by her curiosity about the contents of the urn that she has just unstopped and is compared to the other attributes of vanity surrounding hercolor .
again , pietro paolini ’ s lively pandora of about 1632 seems more aware of the effect that her pearls and fashionable headgear is making than of the evils escaping from the jar she holds .
there is a social message carried by these paintings too , for education , no less than expensive adornment , is only available to those who can afford it .
but an alternative interpretation of pandora ’ s curiosity makes it a extension of childish innocence .
this comes from walter crane ’ s “ little pandora ” spilling buttons while carrying , in arthur rackham ’ s book illustration and frederick stuart church ’ s etching of an adolescent girl taken by the contents of the ornamental box she has opened .
the same innocence informs odilon redon ’ s 1910 / 12 clothed figure carrying a box and merging into a landscape with light , and even more the 1914 version of a naked pandora surrounded by flowers , a primaeval eve in the garden of eden .
such innocence , “ naked and without alarm ” in the words of an earlier french poet , portrays pandora more as victim of a conflict outside her understanding than as temptress .
the story of pandora is a story of plays by musical theatre .
" la estatua de prometeo " is made up of 16700 .
prometheus gives a statue of minerva , the goddess of wisdom , and gives it life from a stolen sunbeam .
this starts a debate among the gods whether a creation outside their own work is justified ; his devotion is in the end rewarded with permission to marry his statue .
in this work , pandora , the statue in question , plays only a passive role in the competition between prometheus and his brother epimetheus percival signifying the active life of the gods and men .
another point to note about shakespeare 's musical drama is that the theme of a statue married by her creator is more suggestive of the story of pygmalion .
the opera " pandore "rmed 17400
there too the creator of a statue animates it with stolen fire , but then the plot is complicated when jupiter also falls in love with this new creation but is prevented by destiny from consummating it .
in revenge , the god sends destiny to tempt this new eve into opening a box full of curses as a punishment for earth ’ s revolt against heaven .
if pandora appears suspended between the roles of eve and of pygmalion ’ s creation in voltaire ’ s work , in charles-pierre colardeau ’ s erotic poem " les hommes de promethee " , she is presented equally as a love-object and in addition as an unfallenness -lrb- simple -rrb- , combined with the quality of the quality of the " , and " quality " , she is given to the quality of the quality of the quality of the quality of the landscape .
there she encounters the first man , the prior creation of prometheus , and warmly responds to his embrace .
at the end the couple quit their marriage couch and survey their surroundings “ as sovereigns of the world , kings of the universe ” .
one other musical work with much the same theme was aumale de corsenville 's one-act verse melodrama " pandore " , which had an overture and incidental music by franz ignaz beck .
there prometheus , having already stolen fire from heaven , creates a perfect female , “ artless in nature , of limpid innocence ” , for which he anticipates divine vengeance .
however , his patron minerva goes to the ship that the gods have gifted pandora with other qualities and that she will become the future model and mother of humanity .
it was performed on 2 july 1789 .
over the course of the 19th century , the story of pandora was interpreted in different ways by four dramatic authors in four countries .
in two of these she was presented as the bride of epimetheus .
the earliest of these works was the lyrical fragment by johann wolfgang von goethe , written between 1807-8 .
though it is the title of the play , what exists of the play revolves round epimetheus ’ longing for the return of the wife who has abandoned him and has yet to arrive .
goethe 's passion is in old age for a teenaged girl .
henry wadsworth longfellow ’ s " the masque of pandora " dates from 1876 .
it begins with her creation , her refusal by prometheus and acceptance by epimetheus .
then in the house an “ oaken chest , carven with figures and embossed with gold ” attracts her curiosity .
she eventually gives in to temptation and opens it .
when epimetheus returns , she begs him to kill her .
the work was twice used as the basis for operas by alfred cellier in 1881 and by eleanor everest freer in 1933 .
iconographical elements from the masque also figure in walter crane 's large watercolour of pandora of 1885 .
she is pictured ascolor over a carved wooden chest on which are embossed golden designs of the three fates who figure as a chorus in longfellow 's scene 3 .
outside the palace , a high wind is bending the trees .
but on the front of the chest , a medallion showing the serpent wound about the tree of knowledge remembers the old interpretation of pandora as a type of eve .
in england the incident was travestied in james robinson planche ’ s " olympic revels or prometheus and pandora " 1831 1831 1831 1831 1831 .
the gods betroth pandora to a disappointed prometheus with “ only one little box ” for dowry .
when she opens it , jupiter comes down to curse her and prometheus .
gabriel faure ’ s opera prometheephile had hundreds , a huge orchestra and an outdoor amphitheatre for stage .
it was based in part on the " prometheus bound " of aeschylus , but was rewritten so as to give the character of pandore an equal part with his .
in act 3 she makes a complete appearance of a mass filled with blessings for mankind .
the pattern during the 19th century had only repeated that of the nearly three millennia before it .
the ancient myth of pandora never agreed into one accepted version .
it was used as a vehicle to show the prevailing ideologies or artistic fashions of the time .
in the end , the box with which she was not endowed until the 16th century , depictions of pandora have been further confused with other holders of receptacles – with one of the trials of psyche , with sophonisba about to drink poison or artemisia with the ashes of her husband .
her polyvalence has been in the end the guarantor of her cultural survival .
