the process of speciation may fall within the purview of either , depending on the forces thought to drive it .
paleontology , evolutionary developmental biology , comparative genomics and genomic phylostratigraphy contribute much of the evidence for macroevolution 's patterns and processes .
the term macroevolution was first used in the paleontologist otto schindewolf to describe their theories of orthogenesis .
this was the vitalist belief that organisms evolve in a definite direction due to an internal " driving force " .
the difference between micro-and macroevolution is that of time and scale .
as ernst mayr observes , " transspecific evolution is nothing but an extrapolation and magnification of the events that take place within populations and species . . it is misleading to make a distinction between the causes of micro-and macroevolution " .
however , time is not necessary to distinguish factormacroevolution can happen without gradual compounding of small changes .
there are many ways to view macroevolution , for example by observing changes in the genetics , morphology , taxonomy , ecology , and behavior of organisms .
, a greek philosopher , and a professor of theology , stated that the connection as " as taxonomic diversity has increased , there have been incentives for tetrapods to move into new modes of life , where initially resources may seem unlimited , there are few competitors and possible refuge from danger .
and as ecological diversity increases , taxa diversify from their ancestors at a much greater rate among faunas with more superior , innovative or more flexible adaptations .
over a long period of time , this can cause big effects on the genetics of organisms .
over a long period of time , this can cause big effects on the taxonomy of organisms , with the growth of whole new clades above the species level .
over a long period of time , this can cause big effects on the morphology of major clades .
this can be seen in the cetacea , where throughout the group 's early evolution , hindlimbs were still present .
they are able to use many available niches , following an adaptive radiation .
this can lead to convergent evolution as the empty niches are filled by whichever lifeform encounters them .