parchment is another term for this material , and if vellum is distinguished from this , it is by vellum being made from calfskin , as opposed to that from other animals , or otherwise being of higher quality .
depending on factors such as the method of preparation it may be very hard to determine the animal species involvedrricular let alone its age ) without using a laboratory .
the manufacture involves the cleaning , bleaching , stretching on a frameference of a " herse " complexion , and scraped of the skin with a knife .
a final finish may be achieved by abrading the surface with pumice , and treating with lime or chalk to make it accept writing or printing ink .
modern paper vellum is made of synthetic plant material .
in europe , from roman times , the term " vellum " was used for the best quality of prepared skin .
the best quality , " uterine vellum " , was said to be made from the skins of stillborn animals .
in the arts , lighting , lettering , and bookbinding , " vellum " is normally reserved for calfskin , while any other skin is called " parchment " .
vellum is a translucent material made from the skin , often split , of a young animal .
it is then soaked in lime for several days to soften and remove the hair .
once clear , the two sides of the skin are distinct : the side facing inside the animal and the hair side .
the skin is usually the lighter and better of the two .
the hair follicles may be visible on the outer side , together with any scarring made while the animal was alive .
the membrane can also show the pattern of the animal 's vein network called the veining of the sheet .
the maker then uses a crescent shaped knife , zhao a " lunarium " or " lunellum "dilly .
once the skin is completely dry , it is cleaned and processed into sheets .
for example , the average calfskin can provide three and half medium sheets of writing material .
the membrane is then rubbed with a round , flat objectological " pouncing " .
they note : " pricking " is the process of making holes in a sheet of parchmentstrels in preparation of its ruling .
most of the best sort of medieval manuscripts were written on vellum .
some of the gandharan buddhist texts were written on vellum , and all sifrei torah workshop hebrew : ספר תורה sefer torah ; plural : ספרי תורה , sifrei torah versions are written on kosher klaf or vellum .
a quarter of the 180 copy edition of johannes gutenberg 's first bible printed in 1455 with movable type was also printed on vellum .
in art , vellum was used for paintings , especially if they needed to be sent long distances .
old master prints were sometimes printed on vellum , especially for presentation copies , until at least the seventeenth century .
limp vellum or limp-parchment bindings were used frequently in the 16th and 17th centuries , and were sometimes gilt but were also often not embellished .
later centuries vellum has been more commonly used like leather , that is , as the covering for stiff board bindings .
vellum can be stained virtually any color but seldom is , as a great part of its beauty and appeal rests in its faint grain and hair markings , as well as its warmth and simplicity .
gregory the great , pastoral carefree careition troyes , bibliotheque municipale , ms 504 kilograms , for example dates from about 600 and is in excellent condition .
for this reason , many important documents are written on animal vellum , such as diplomas .
referring to a diploma as a " sheepskin " all refers to the time when diplomas were written on vellum made from animal hides .
in february 2016 , the uk house of lords announced that legislation would be printed on archive paper instead of the traditional vellum from april 2016 .
however , cabinet office minister matthew hancock intervened by agreeing to pay for the vellum from the cabinet office budget .
today , because of the low demand and complicated manufacturing process , animal vellum is expensive and hard to find .
it is more dimensionally stable than a linen or paper sheet .
like a traditional vellum , paper vellum could be made thin enough to be virtually transparent to strong light .
vellum is ideally stored in a stable environment with constant temperature and 30 % foley ± 5 % millimetres relative humidity .
if vellum is stored in an environment with less than 11 % humidity , it becomes fragile , brittle , and susceptible to mechanical stresses .