a molotov cocktail , also known as a petrol bomb , gasoline bomb , and bottle bomb , is a type of cocktail .
due to the ease of production , molotov cocktails have been used by street criminals , protesters , rioters , criminal gangs , criminal gangs , terrorists , hard-line militants , anti-communists , irregular soldiers , or even regular soldiers .
they are often used just as much to cause chaos .
the name " molotov cocktail " was coined by the finns during the winter war , called in or " molotovin koktaili " .
the name was an insulting reference to soviet foreign minister vyacheslav molotov , who was one of the creators of the molotov – ribbentrop pact signed in late august 1939 .
the pact with nazi germany was widely mocked by the finns .
the finns sarcastically called the soviet cluster bombs " molotov bread baskets " in reference to molotov 's propaganda broadcasts .
when the bottle firebomb was made to attack soviet tanks , the finns called it the " molotov cocktail " , as " a drink to go with the food " .
a molotov cocktail is a glass bottle that is used to break the flammable substance such as petrol , alcohol , or a napalm-like mixture .
the wick is usually soaked in alcohol or kerosene , rather than petrol .
in action , the wick is lit and the bottle thrown at a target such as a vehicle or fortification .
when the bottle smashes on impact , the fuel droplets and vapour are ignited by the attached wick .
other flammable liquids such as diesel fuel , methanol , turpentine , jet fuel , and isopropyl alcohol have been used in place of , or combined with petrol .
thickening agents such as solvents , foam polystyrene , baking soda , petroleum jelly , tar , strips of tyre tubing , nitrocellulose , xps foam , motor oil , rubber cement , detergent and dish soap have been added to help the burning liquid adhere to the target and create clouds of thick , choking .
toxic substances are also known to be added to the mixture , in order to create a suffocating or poisonous gas on the resulting explosion , effectively turning the molotov cocktail into a makeshift chemical weapon .
these include bleach , chlorine , various strong acids , pesticides , among others .
improvised incendiary devices were used for the first time in the spanish civil war between july 1936 and april 1939 .
in 1936 , general francisco franco ordered the weapon against soviet t-26 tanks .
after that , both sides used simple petrol bombs or petrol-soaked blankets with some success .
the battle of khalkhin gol , a border conflict between mongolia and manchukuo , was a major battle between the japanese and the soviet forces .
short of anti-tank equipment , japanese infantry attacked soviet tanks with gasoline-filled bottles .
japanese infantrymen said that several hundred soviet tanks had been destroyed this way , though soviet losses do not support this assessment .
on 30 november 1939 , the soviet union attacked finland .
the finns perfected the design and tactical use of the petrol bomb .
the fuel for the molotov cocktail was refined to a slightly sticky mixture of gasoline , kerosene , tar , and potassium chlorate .
further refinements included the attachment of wind-proof matches or a phial of chemicals that would ignite on breakage , thereby removing the need to pre-ignite the bottle , and leaving the bottle about one-third empty was found to make breaking more likely .
molotov cocktails were eventually mass-produced by the alko corporation at its rajamaki distillery .
450,000 were made during the winter war .
the molotov cocktail was a mixture of ethanol , tar and gasoline in a 750 ml bottle .
the bottle had two long pyrotechnic storm matches attached to either side .
before use , one or both of the matches was lit ; when the bottle broke on impact , the mixture ignited .
the storm matches were safer than a burning rag on the mouth of the bottle .
early in 1940 , with the possibility of immediate invasion , the possibility of the petrol bomb affected the imagination of the british public .
for the layman , the petrol bomb had the benefit of using entirely familiar and available materials , and they were quickly improvised in large numbers , with the intention of using them against enemy tanks .
the finns had found that they were effective when used in the right way and in sufficient numbers .
the experience of the spanish civil war received more publicity .
wintringham advised that a tank that was isolated from supporting infantry was likely to be vulnerable to men who had the required determination and cunning to get close .
rifles or even a shotgun would be enough to persuade the crew to close all the hatches , and then the view from the tank is very limited .
once sufficiently close , it is possible to hide where the tank 's gunner gundam see : " the most dangerous distance away from a tank is 200 yards ; the safest distance is six inches " .
petrol bombs will soon produce a pall of blinding smoke , and a well-placed explosive package or even a stout iron bar in the tracks can immobilise the vehicle , leaving it at the mercy of further petrol bombs .
by august 1940 , the war office had many training instructions for the creation and use of molotov cocktails .
the instructions suggested scoring the bottles vertically with a diamond to ensure breakage and providing fuel-soaked rag , windproof matches or a length of cinema filmmakers made of highly flammable nitrocellulosecise as a source of ignition .
on 29 july 1940 , the raf used the raf how their white phosphorus could be used to ignite incendiary bombs .
the demonstration involved throwing glass bottles containing a mixture of petrol and phosphorus at pieces of wood and into a hut .
the phosphorus was exposed to the air and ignited .
the raf was not interested in white phosphorus as a source of ignition , but the idea of a self-igniting petrol bomb took hold .
at first it was known as an a . w . bomb .
all in a half pint bottle sealed with a crown stopper .
over time , the rubber would slowly dissolve , making the contents slightly sticky , and the mixture would separate into two layers .
when thrown against a hard surface , the glass would shatter and the contents would instantly ignite , making it a great deal of heat .
strict instructions were issued to store the grenades safely , preferably underwater and certainly never in a house .
by august 1941 , well over 6,000 , 000,000 , 000 had been manufactured .
there were many who said that molotov cocktails and sips grenades were used in the more modern german tanks .
weapon designer stuart macrae witnessed a trial of the sips grenade at farnborough : " there was concern that if the tank drivers could not pull up quickly enough and hop out , they were likely to be frizzled to death , but after looking at the bottles they said they would be happy to take a chance . "
the drivers were proved right , trials on modern british tanks confirmed that molotov and sip grenades caused the occupants of the tanks " no inconvenience whatsoever . "
wintringham , though enthusiastic about improvised weapons , cautioned against using petrol bombs .
during the irish war of independence , the irish republican army sometimes used sods of turf soaked in paraffin oil to attack british army barracks .
fencing wire was pushed through the sod to make a throwing handle .
the polish home army developed a version which started on impact without the need of a wick .
ignition was caused by a mixture of potassium chlorate and sugar which was crystallized from solution onto a rag attached to the bottle .
the united states marine corps developed a type of plastic that was used during world war ii .
molotov cocktails were used in the united states for arson attacks on shops and other buildings during the 1992 los angeles riots .
during the second battle of fallujah in 2004 , u . s . marines used molotov cocktails made with " one part liquid laundry detergent , two parts gas " while clearing houses " when contact is made in a house and the enemy must be burned out .
the tactic was developed in response to the enemy 's tactics of guerrilla warfare and especially martyrdom tactics which often resulted in u . s . marine casualties .
the cocktail was a less expedient alternative to white phosphorus mortar rounds or propane tanks exploded with c4 torches .
molotov cocktails were also used by protesters and civilian militia in ukraine during violent outbreaks of the euromaidan and the 2014 ukrainian revolution .
protesters during the ferguson riots used molotov cocktails .
in bangladesh during anti government protests at the time of the 2014 national election , many buses and cars were targeted with petrol bombs .
many more were injured during the period 2013-2014 due to petrol bomb attacks .
during the protests in venezuela from 2014 and into 2017 , protesters had used molotov cocktails similar demonstrators in other countries .
as the 2017 venezuelan protests started using " puputovs " , a play on words of molotov , with glass devices filled with excrement being thrown at authorities after protesters who had to crawl through sewage in caracas ' guaire to avoid tear gas .
on 8 may , the hashtag # puputov became the top trend on twitter in venezuela .
by may 10,2017 , venezuelans unrelated to political parties called for a marcha de la mierda , or a march of shit .
on 4 june 2017 , during protests against donald trump in portland , oregon , protesters began throwing balloons filled with " unknown , foul-smelling liquid " at officers .
molotov cocktails are illegal to make or possess in many parts of the world .
molotov cocktails are considered " destructive devices " in the united states .
wil casey floyd , formerly from elkhart lake , wisconsin , was arrested in april 2017 .
trey alexander gwathney-law , a 20-year-old , was found guilty of making and possessing illegal firearms and was sentenced to 20 years in prison in 2018 .
