the name was an insulting reference to soviet foreign minister vyacheslav molotov , who was one of the creators of the molotov – ribbentrop pact signed in late august 1939 .
the pact with nazi germany was widely mocked by the finns .
in action , the wick is lit and the bottle thrown at a target such as a vehicle or fortification .
when the bottle smashes on impact , the fuel droplets and vapour are ignited by the attached wick .
other flammable liquids such as diesel fuel , methanol , turpentine , jet fuel , and isopropyl alcohol have been used in place of , or combined with petrol .
thickening agents such as solvents , foam polystyrene , baking soda , petroleum jelly , tar , strips of tyre tubing , nitrocellulose , xps foam , motor oil , rubber cement , detergent and dish soap have been added to help the burning liquid adhere to the target and create clouds of thick , choking .
toxic substances are also known to be added to the mixture , in order to create a suffocating or poisonous gas on the resulting explosion , effectively turning the molotov cocktail into a makeshift chemical weapon .
improvised incendiary devices were used for the first time in the spanish civil war between july 1936 and april 1939 .
in 1936 , general francisco franco ordered the weapon against soviet t-26 tanks .
the battle of khalkhin gol , a border conflict between mongolia and manchukuo , was a major battle between the japanese and the soviet forces .
japanese infantrymen said that several hundred soviet tanks had been destroyed this way , though soviet losses do not support this assessment .
the fuel for the molotov cocktail was refined to a slightly sticky mixture of gasoline , kerosene , tar , and potassium chlorate .
further refinements included the attachment of wind-proof matches or a phial of chemicals that would ignite on breakage , thereby removing the need to pre-ignite the bottle , and leaving the bottle about one-third empty was found to make breaking more likely .
before use , one or both of the matches was lit ; when the bottle broke on impact , the mixture ignited .
the storm matches were safer than a burning rag on the mouth of the bottle .
for the layman , the petrol bomb had the benefit of using entirely familiar and available materials , and they were quickly improvised in large numbers , with the intention of using them against enemy tanks .
wintringham advised that a tank that was isolated from supporting infantry was likely to be vulnerable to men who had the required determination and cunning to get close .
rifles or even a shotgun would be enough to persuade the crew to close all the hatches , and then the view from the tank is very limited .
once sufficiently close , it is possible to hide where the tank 's gunner gundam see : " the most dangerous distance away from a tank is 200 yards ; the safest distance is six inches " .
petrol bombs will soon produce a pall of blinding smoke , and a well-placed explosive package or even a stout iron bar in the tracks can immobilise the vehicle , leaving it at the mercy of further petrol bombs .
the instructions suggested scoring the bottles vertically with a diamond to ensure breakage and providing fuel-soaked rag , windproof matches or a length of cinema filmmakers made of highly flammable nitrocellulosecise as a source of ignition .
on 29 july 1940 , the raf used the raf how their white phosphorus could be used to ignite incendiary bombs .
the demonstration involved throwing glass bottles containing a mixture of petrol and phosphorus at pieces of wood and into a hut .
the raf was not interested in white phosphorus as a source of ignition , but the idea of a self-igniting petrol bomb took hold .
over time , the rubber would slowly dissolve , making the contents slightly sticky , and the mixture would separate into two layers .
when thrown against a hard surface , the glass would shatter and the contents would instantly ignite , making it a great deal of heat .
there were many who said that molotov cocktails and sips grenades were used in the more modern german tanks .
weapon designer stuart macrae witnessed a trial of the sips grenade at farnborough : " there was concern that if the tank drivers could not pull up quickly enough and hop out , they were likely to be frizzled to death , but after looking at the bottles they said they would be happy to take a chance . "
the drivers were proved right , trials on modern british tanks confirmed that molotov and sip grenades caused the occupants of the tanks " no inconvenience whatsoever . "
during the irish war of independence , the irish republican army sometimes used sods of turf soaked in paraffin oil to attack british army barracks .
ignition was caused by a mixture of potassium chlorate and sugar which was crystallized from solution onto a rag attached to the bottle .
the united states marine corps developed a type of plastic that was used during world war ii .
molotov cocktails were used in the united states for arson attacks on shops and other buildings during the 1992 los angeles riots .
during the second battle of fallujah in 2004 , u . s . marines used molotov cocktails made with " one part liquid laundry detergent , two parts gas " while clearing houses " when contact is made in a house and the enemy must be burned out .
the tactic was developed in response to the enemy 's tactics of guerrilla warfare and especially martyrdom tactics which often resulted in u . s . marine casualties .
in bangladesh during anti government protests at the time of the 2014 national election , many buses and cars were targeted with petrol bombs .
during the protests in venezuela from 2014 and into 2017 , protesters had used molotov cocktails similar demonstrators in other countries .
as the 2017 venezuelan protests started using " puputovs " , a play on words of molotov , with glass devices filled with excrement being thrown at authorities after protesters who had to crawl through sewage in caracas ' guaire to avoid tear gas .
on 8 may , the hashtag # puputov became the top trend on twitter in venezuela .
by may 10,2017 , venezuelans unrelated to political parties called for a marcha de la mierda , or a march of shit .