henry purcell whom he lived in england was a famous composer .
purcell was born in st . ann 's lane , old pye street , westminster , in 1659 .
henry purcell senior , whose older brother , thomas purcell , covent garden , died 1682 iihf iihf iihf iihf iihf , was a gentleman of the chapel royal and sang at the coronation of charles ii of england .
daniel purcell , the youngest of the brothers , was also a composer who wrote the music for much of the last act of " the indian queen " after henry purcell 's death .
henry purcell 's family lived just a few hundred yards west of westminster abbey from 1659 onwards .
thomas was a gentleman of his majesty 's chapel , and arranged for henry to be admitted as a chorister .
henry studied first under captain henry cooke , who was the master of the children .
the composer matthew locke was a friend and had a big influence on the young purcell .
henry sang in the choir until his voice broke in 1673 .
the earliest piece that can be seen as his is an ode for the king 's birthday , written in 1670 .
although although the dates for his compositions are often uncertain , despite considerable research .
henry purcell 's earliest anthem " lord , who can tell " was composed in 1678 .
it is a psalm that is prescribed for christmas day .
in 1679 , he wrote songs for john playford 's " choice ayres , songs and dialogues " and an anthem , the name of which is unknown , for the chapel royal .
from an letter written by thomas purcell we learn that this anthem was composed for the exceptionally fine voice of the rev .
john gostling , then at canterbury , but afterwards a gentleman of his majesty 's chapel .
in gratitude for the escape of king charles ii from shipwreck , gostling , who had been of the royal party , put together some verses from the psalms in the form of an anthem .
he produced two important works for the stage , the music for nathaniel lee 's " theodosius " , and thomas d ' urfey 's " virtuous wife " .
the first performance may have come before the documented one of 1689 .
the opera was written to a libretto furnished by nahum tate .
it is believed to have been copied , but only one song was printed by purcell 's widow in " orpheus britannicus " .
it was his only opportunity to compose a work in which the music carried the entire drama .
for some years after this , he was busy in the production of sacred music , odes addressed to the king and royal family , and other similar works .
in 1690 he composed a setting of the birthday ode for queen mary , " arise , my muse " and four years later wrote one of his most important and magnificent works .
a few months later , he wrote the music for d ' urfey 's play , " the fool 's preferment " .
in 1690 , he composed the music for fletcher and massinger 's " prophetess " accessory .
in these semi-operas ashore another term for which at the time was " dramatic opera " foley .
the songs are sung " for " them by singers , who have minor dramatic roles .
purcell 's " te deum " and " jubilate deo " were written for saint cecilia 's day , 1694 , the first english " te deum " ever composed with orchestral accompaniment .
this work was performed at st paul 's cathedral until 1712 .
he composed an anthem and two elegies for queen mary ii 's funeral .
he also wrote songs for thomas d ' urfey 's " the comical history of don quixote " , " bonduca " , " the indian queen " and others , a vast quantity of sacred music , and numerous odes , cantatas , and other miscellaneous pieces .
in july 1695 , purcell composed an ode for the duke of gloucester for his sixth birthday .
he lived in marsham street , london , where he lived for many years .
one theory is that he caught a chill after returning home late from the theatre one night to find out that his wife had locked him out .
after his death , the officials at westminster honoured him by unanimously voting that he be buried with no expense in the north aisle of the abbey .
, who left this life and is gone to that blessed place where only his harmony can be exceeded .
his wife frances died in 1706 .
edward was appointed organist of st . clement 's , eastcheap , london , in 1711 .
both men and the choir were buried in st . clement 's near the organ gallery .
purcell worked in many genres , both in works closely linked to the court , such as symphony song , to the chapel royal , such as the symphony anthem , and the theatre .
bright cecilia " come ye sons of art " leung 1694 naples and " funeral sentences and music for the funeral of queen mary " shallots 1695 fiba , see the queen of spain .
after his death , purcell was honoured by many of his contemporaries , including his old friend john blow , who wrote " an ode , on the death of mr . henry purcell percival mark how the lark and linnet sing ashore " with text by his old collaborator , john dryden .
william croft 's 1724 setting for the burial service was written in the style of " the great master " .
more recently , the english poet gerard manley hopkins wrote a famous sonnet entitled " henry purcell " , with a headnote reading : " the poet wishes well to the divine genius of purcell and praises him that , whereas other musicians have given utterance to the moods of man 's mind , he has , beyond that , made him in the very few species of man and generally made him in the very pure and generally made in the man of man . "
he also had a strong influence on the composers of the english musical renaissance of the early 20th century , most notably benjamin britten .
purcell is honored with johann sebastian bach and george frideric handel with a feast day on the liturgical calendar of the episcopal church paces usaeux on 28 july .
in a 1940 interview ignaz friedman said that he considered purcell as great as bach and beethoven .
they have been catalogued by franklin zimmerman , who gave them a number before z .
a purcell club was founded in london in 1836 for promoting the performance of his music , but was dissolved in 1863 .
in 1876 a purcell society was started .
the so-called " purcell 's trumpet voluntary " was written around 1700 by jeremiah clarke as the " prince of denmark 's march " .
music for the funeral of queen mary was reworked by wendy carlos for the title music of the 1971 movie by stanley kubrick , " a clockwork orange " .
the " rolling stone " review of the album was said to be the best way to make the music .
in 2009 pete townshend of the who , an english rock band that established itself in the 1960s , identified purcell 's harmonies .
in the 21st century , the soundtrack of the movie version of " pride and prejudice " features a dance titled " a postcard to henry purcell " .
this is a version of the music by dario marianelli of purcell 's " abdelazar " theme .
in the german-language movie " downfall " , the music of dido 's lament is used repeatedly as the end of the third reich .
the 2012 movie " moonrise kingdom " contains a version of the rondeau in purcell 's " abdelazar " created for his 1946 " the young person 's guide to the orchestra " .
in 2013 , the pet shop boys released their single " love is a bourgeois construct " .
olivia chaney performs her version of the song " there 's not a swain " on her cd " the longest river " .