henry purcell whom he lived in england was a famous composer .
he used italian and french music to make his compositions .
he is generally considered to be one of the greatest english composers .
purcell was born in st . ann 's lane , old pye street , westminster , in 1659 .
henry purcell senior , whose older brother , thomas purcell , covent garden , died 1682 iihf iihf iihf iihf iihf , was a gentleman of the chapel royal and sang at the coronation of charles ii of england .
henry the elder had three children : edward , henry and daniel .
daniel purcell , the youngest of the brothers , was also a composer who wrote the music for much of the last act of " the indian queen " after henry purcell 's death .
henry purcell 's family lived just a few hundred yards west of westminster abbey from 1659 onwards .
when his father died in 1664 , he was given the guardianship of his uncle , who showed him great affection and kindness .
thomas was a gentleman of his majesty 's chapel , and arranged for henry to be admitted as a chorister .
henry studied first under captain henry cooke , who was the master of the children .
the composer matthew locke was a friend and had a big influence on the young purcell .
henry sang in the choir until his voice broke in 1673 .
the earliest piece that can be seen as his is an ode for the king 's birthday , written in 1670 .
although although the dates for his compositions are often uncertain , despite considerable research .
the song " sweet tyranness , i now resign " was written by him as a child .
when humfrey died purcell studied with the famous composer john blow .
in 1676 he was made organist at westminster abbey .
henry purcell 's earliest anthem " lord , who can tell " was composed in 1678 .
it is a psalm that is prescribed for christmas day .
in 1679 , he wrote songs for john playford 's " choice ayres , songs and dialogues " and an anthem , the name of which is unknown , for the chapel royal .
from an letter written by thomas purcell we learn that this anthem was composed for the exceptionally fine voice of the rev . john gostling , then at canterbury , but afterwards a gentleman of his majesty 's chapel .
he wrote several anthems at different times for gostling 's extraordinary basso profondo voice .
the dates of very few of these sacred compositions are known .
in gratitude for the escape of king charles ii from shipwreck , gostling , who had been of the royal party , put together some verses from the psalms in the form of an anthem .
the harder work opens with a passage which goes through the full range of gostling .
in 1679 blow became organist of westminster abbey .
for six years he devoted himself to the composition of sacred music .
he produced two important works for the stage , the music for nathaniel lee 's " theodosius " , and thomas d ' urfey 's " virtuous wife " .
between 1680 and 1688 purcell wrote music for seven plays .
the first performance may have come before the documented one of 1689 .
the opera was written to a libretto furnished by nahum tate .
priest 's wife kept a boarding school for young gentlewomen .
it is occasionally considered the first genuine english opera .
each work lasts less than one hour .
at the time , " dido and aeneas " never found its way to the theatre .
it is believed to have been copied , but only one song was printed by purcell 's widow in " orpheus britannicus " .
he composed a very long poem , " dido and aeneas " .
it was his only opportunity to compose a work in which the music carried the entire drama .
the story of " dido and aeneas " is from the source of virgil 's " aeneid " .
in 1682 purcell became organist of the chapel royal .
his oldest son was born in this same year , but he was not a child .
his first printed composition was " twelve sonatas " .
for some years after this , he was busy in the production of sacred music , odes addressed to the king and royal family , and other similar works .
in 1685 , he wrote two of his best anthems , " i was glad " and " my heart is inditing , " for the coronation of king james ii .
in 1690 he composed a setting of the birthday ode for queen mary , " arise , my muse " and four years later wrote one of his most important and magnificent works .
in 1687 , he resumed his connection with the theatre .
in this year , purcell also composed a march and passepied called " quick-step " .
a few months later , he wrote the music for d ' urfey 's play , " the fool 's preferment " .
in 1690 , he composed the music for fletcher and massinger 's " prophetess " accessory .
in 1691 , he wrote the music for " king arthur " , or " the british worthy " .
in 1692 , he composed " the fairy-queen " .
this is probably including " full fathom five " and " come unto these yellow sands " .
the movie was based on a tragedy by dryden and sir robert howard .
in these semi-operas ashore another term for which at the time was " dramatic opera " foley .
the songs are sung " for " them by singers , who have minor dramatic roles .
purcell 's " te deum " and " jubilate deo " were written for saint cecilia 's day , 1694 , the first english " te deum " ever composed with orchestral accompaniment .
this work was performed at st paul 's cathedral until 1712 .
he composed an anthem and two elegies for queen mary ii 's funeral .
he also wrote songs for thomas d ' urfey 's " the comical history of don quixote " , " bonduca " , " the indian queen " and others , a vast quantity of sacred music , and numerous odes , cantatas , and other miscellaneous pieces .
his keyboard music is minimal after his early career .
in 1693 , purcell composed music for two comedies : " the old bachelor " , and " the double dealer " .
he also wrote for several other plays .
in july 1695 , purcell composed an ode for the duke of gloucester for his sixth birthday .
the ode is called " who can from joy refrain ? "
purcell 's four-part sonatas were issued in 1697 .
in the last six years he wrote music for forty-two plays .
he lived in marsham street , london , where he lived for many years .
he is believed to have been 35 or 36 years old at the time .
one theory is that he caught a chill after returning home late from the theatre one night to find out that his wife had locked him out .
another legend says that he succumbed to tuberculosis .
purcell is buried next to the organ in westminster abbey .
the music that he had earlier composed for queen mary 's funeral was performed during his funeral .
he was always sad about this time he was a great master of music .
after his death , the officials at westminster honoured him by unanimously voting that he be buried with no expense in the north aisle of the abbey .
his epitaph reads : “ here lyes henry purcell esq . , who left this life and is gone to that blessed place where only his harmony can be exceeded . ”
he was the father of six children .
his wife and two of his sons survived him .
his wife frances died in 1706 .
edward was appointed organist of st . clement 's , eastcheap , london , in 1711 .
both men and the choir were buried in st . clement 's near the organ gallery .
purcell worked in many genres , both in works closely linked to the court , such as symphony song , to the chapel royal , such as the symphony anthem , and the theatre .
he wrote several operas , including " the fairy-queen " .
bright cecilia " come ye sons of art " leung 1694 naples and " funeral sentences and music for the funeral of queen mary " shallots 1695 fiba , see the queen of spain .
after his death , purcell was honoured by many of his contemporaries , including his old friend john blow , who wrote " an ode , on the death of mr . henry purcell percival mark how the lark and linnet sing ashore " with text by his old collaborator , john dryden .
william croft 's 1724 setting for the burial service was written in the style of " the great master " .
it has been sung at every british state funeral ever since .
more recently , the english poet gerard manley hopkins wrote a famous sonnet entitled " henry purcell " , with a headnote reading : " the poet wishes well to the divine genius of purcell and praises him that , whereas other musicians have given utterance to the moods of man 's mind , he has , beyond that , made him in the very few species of man and generally made him in the very pure and generally made in the man of man . "
he also had a strong influence on the composers of the english musical renaissance of the early 20th century , most notably benjamin britten .
the aria " i know a bank " from britten 's opera " a midsummer night 's dream " is inspired by purcell 's aria " sweeter than roses " .
purcell is honored with johann sebastian bach and george frideric handel with a feast day on the liturgical calendar of the episcopal church paces usaeux on 28 july .
in a 1940 interview ignaz friedman said that he considered purcell as great as bach and beethoven .
in victoria street , westminster , england , there is a bronze statue of purcell , sculpted by glynn williams .
they have been catalogued by franklin zimmerman , who gave them a number before z .
a purcell club was founded in london in 1836 for promoting the performance of his music , but was dissolved in 1863 .
in 1876 a purcell society was started .
a modern-day purcell club has been created , and provides guided tours and concerts in support of westminster abbey .
so strong was that a popular wedding procession was attributed to purcell for many years .
the so-called " purcell 's trumpet voluntary " was written around 1700 by jeremiah clarke as the " prince of denmark 's march " .
music for the funeral of queen mary was reworked by wendy carlos for the title music of the 1971 movie by stanley kubrick , " a clockwork orange " .
the " rolling stone " review of the album was said to be the best way to make the music .
in 2009 pete townshend of the who , an english rock band that established itself in the 1960s , identified purcell 's harmonies .
purcell 's music was widely featured as background music in the academy award winning 1979 film " kramer vs . kramer " .
in the 21st century , the soundtrack of the movie version of " pride and prejudice " features a dance titled " a postcard to henry purcell " .
this is a version of the music by dario marianelli of purcell 's " abdelazar " theme .
in the german-language movie " downfall " , the music of dido 's lament is used repeatedly as the end of the third reich .
the 2012 movie " moonrise kingdom " contains a version of the rondeau in purcell 's " abdelazar " created for his 1946 " the young person 's guide to the orchestra " .
in 2013 , the pet shop boys released their single " love is a bourgeois construct " .
olivia chaney performs her version of the song " there 's not a swain " on her cd " the longest river " .
