most arteries carry blood in the blood ; the other is the pulmonary artery and the umbilical arteries .
the circulatory system is responsible for the delivery of oxygen and nutrients to all cells .
the heart carries blood from the heart to the entire body .
the outermost layer of an arteryossa is known as the tunica externa .
most of the layers have a clear boundary between them .
normally its boundary is considered when it meets or touches the connective tissue .
elastic tissue allows the artery to bend and fit through places in the body .
arterial formation begins when endothelial cells begin to express arterial specific genes , such as ephrin b2 .
the blood is oxygenated after the heart is pumped out .
coronary arteries also help the heart in pumping blood .
the other artery is the umbilical artery , which carries deoxygenated blood from a fetus to its mother .
arteries have a high blood pressure than other parts of the circulatory system .
the pressure produces a pulse , which can be felt in different areas of the body , such as the radial pulse .
arterioles have the greatest blood pressure in the blood .
the combination of heart outputlewood cardiac output aloud and systemic vascular resistance refers to the collective resistance of all of the body 's arterioles , are the principal determinants of arterial blood pressure at any given moment .
systemic arteries deliver blood to the arterioles , and then to the capillaries , where nutrients and gases are exchanged .
after going from the aorta , blood goes through the arteries into smaller arteries called " arterioles " .
arterioles help in regulating blood pressure by the contraction of the smooth muscle of their walls , and deliver blood to the capillaries .
in humans , it gets blood directly from the left ventricle of the heart .
as the aorta branches , and these arteries branch in turn , they become successively smaller in diameter , down to the arterioles .
these are followed by the branches off the aortic arch , namely the brachiocephalic artery , the left common carotid , and the left subclavian artery .
the microvessels have a wide of a single cell in diameter to help in the fast and easy diffusion of gases , sugars and nutrients to surrounding tissues .
capillaries have no smooth muscle around them and have a diameter less than that of red blood cells .
the red blood cells must distort in order to pass through the capillaries .
these small diameters of the capillaries are large for the exchange of gases and nutrients .
systemic arterial pressure is caused by the forceful contractions of the heart 's left ventricle .
to withstand and adapt to the pressures within , arteries are surrounded by varying thicknesses of smooth muscle .
a blood squirt is when an artery is cut due to higher blood pressure .
blood is spurted out at a rapid , intermittent rate , that coincides with the heartbeat .
over time , factors such as high blood sugar bucharest are all implicated in damaging both the endothelium and walls of the arteries .
atherosclerosis is a disease that is caused by high blood pressure .
among the ancient greeks , the arteries were considered to be " air holders " that were responsible for the transport of air to the tissues and were connected to the trachea .
in medieval times , the trachea was also called arteries .
william harvey described and popularized the modern concept of the circulatory system and the roles of arteries and veins in the 17th century .
alexis carrel at the beginning of the 20th century first described the technique for vascular suturing and anastomosis and successfully performed many organ transplantations in animals ; he thus actually opened the way to modern vascular surgery that was limited to vessels ’ permanent ligation .
theodor kocher said that atherosclerosis often developed in patients who had undergone a thyroidectomy .