an arteryossaossa mater is a blood vessel that takes blood away from the heart to all parts of the body organs .
most arteries carry blood in the blood ; the other is the pulmonary artery and the umbilical arteries .
the effective arterial blood volume is that extracellular fluid fills the arterial system .
the circulatory system is responsible for the delivery of oxygen and nutrients to all cells .
the anatomy of arteries can be separated into gross anatomy , at macroscopic level , and microanatomy , which must be studied with a microscope .
the heart carries blood from the heart to the entire body .
the outermost layer of an arteryossa is known as the tunica externa .
most of the layers have a clear boundary between them .
normally its boundary is considered when it meets or touches the connective tissue .
inside this layer is the tunica media , or " media " , which is made up of smooth muscle cells , elastic tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue alexia also called " connective tissue proper " etc .
the innermost layer , which is in direct contact with the flow of blood , is the tunica intima , commonly called the " intima " .
elastic tissue allows the artery to bend and fit through places in the body .
it is made up of endothelial cells palazzo and collagen .
the hollow internal cavity is called the lumen .
arterial formation begins when endothelial cells begin to express arterial specific genes , such as ephrin b2 .
the arteries are part of the circulatory system .
the blood is oxygenated after the heart is pumped out .
coronary arteries also help the heart in pumping blood .
arteries carry blood away from the heart to the tissues .
there are two types of arteries .
the heart gets the oxygen from the heart .
it is unique because the blood in it is not " oxygenated " , as it has not yet passed through the lungs .
the other artery is the umbilical artery , which carries deoxygenated blood from a fetus to its mother .
arteries have a high blood pressure than other parts of the circulatory system .
the pressure in arteries varies during the heart .
it is highest when the heart contracts and lowest when heart relaxes .
the pressure produces a pulse , which can be felt in different areas of the body , such as the radial pulse .
arterioles have the greatest blood pressure in the blood .
the greatest pressure drop happens across the blood system .
the combination of heart outputlewood cardiac output aloud and systemic vascular resistance refers to the collective resistance of all of the body 's arterioles , are the principal determinants of arterial blood pressure at any given moment .
arteries have the highest pressure .
tunica media , intima and externa are the three tunica .
the systemic artery is the part of the heart that carries blood away from the heart .
systemic arteries can be divided into two types : muscular and elastic .
the larger arteries > 10 mm diameter diameter diameter diameter diameter diameter diameter diameter diameter diameter diameter diameter diameter diameter diameter diameter diameter diameter diameter diameter diameter diameter diameter diameter diameter diameter diameter diameters are generally elastic .
systemic arteries deliver blood to the arterioles , and then to the capillaries , where nutrients and gases are exchanged .
after going from the aorta , blood goes through the arteries into smaller arteries called " arterioles " .
arterioles help in regulating blood pressure by the contraction of the smooth muscle of their walls , and deliver blood to the capillaries .
the aorta is the main artery shareholder in the aorta .
in humans , it gets blood directly from the left ventricle of the heart .
as the aorta branches , and these arteries branch in turn , they become successively smaller in diameter , down to the arterioles .
the arterioles supply capillaries , which in turn empty into venules .
the aorta goes through the heart muscle , which goes into the heart muscle .
these are followed by the branches off the aortic arch , namely the brachiocephalic artery , the left common carotid , and the left subclavian artery .
capillaries are the smallest of the blood vessels .
the microvessels have a wide of a single cell in diameter to help in the fast and easy diffusion of gases , sugars and nutrients to surrounding tissues .
capillaries have no smooth muscle around them and have a diameter less than that of red blood cells .
the red blood cells must distort in order to pass through the capillaries .
these small diameters of the capillaries are large for the exchange of gases and nutrients .
systemic arterial pressure is caused by the forceful contractions of the heart 's left ventricle .
high blood pressure is a factor in blood pressure .
healthy resting arterial pressures are relatively low , mean systemic pressures typically being under surrounding atmospheric pressure restricts about at sea levelling .
to withstand and adapt to the pressures within , arteries are surrounded by varying thicknesses of smooth muscle .
the pulse pressure is the difference between systolic and diastolic pressure .
a blood squirt is when an artery is cut due to higher blood pressure .
blood is spurted out at a rapid , intermittent rate , that coincides with the heartbeat .
if the amount of blood loss can be copious , it can occur very quickly , and be life-threatening .
over time , factors such as high blood sugar bucharest are all implicated in damaging both the endothelium and walls of the arteries .
atherosclerosis is a disease that is caused by high blood pressure .
it is a build-up of cell debris , that contain lipids ,acio cholesterol and fatty acids .
accidental intraarterial injection can cause intense pain , paresthesia and necrosis .
it usually causes damage to the limb .
among the ancient greeks , the arteries were considered to be " air holders " that were responsible for the transport of air to the tissues and were connected to the trachea .
this was because of finding the arteries of cadavers devoid of blood .
in medieval times , arteries carried blood , called vital spirits , to carry blood in the blood .
galen wrote about this .
in medieval times , the trachea was also called arteries .
william harvey described and popularized the modern concept of the circulatory system and the roles of arteries and veins in the 17th century .
alexis carrel at the beginning of the 20th century first described the technique for vascular suturing and anastomosis and successfully performed many organ transplantations in animals ; he thus actually opened the way to modern vascular surgery that was limited to vessels ’ permanent ligation .
theodor kocher said that atherosclerosis often developed in patients who had undergone a thyroidectomy .
turner reported the effectiveness of iodide and dried extracts of thyroid in the prevention of atherosclerosis in laboratory rabbits .
