duck hunt is a light gun shooter video game made by nintendo for the nintendo entertainment system .
it was released in japan in 1984 and was released in north america in october 1985 .
in " duck hunt " , players use the nintendo zapper zappers in combination with a crt television to shoot ducks that appear on the screen .
the ducks are allowed to play one or two at a time .
the player gets points after shooting each duck .
if the player shoots the required number of ducks in a single round , the player will advance to the next round .
the game received very positive reviews .
before the nes version , nintendo also made a " duck hunt " game based on laser clay shooting system released in 1976 .
it was later a pack-in game , along with " super mario bros . " .
the game was released for the wii u in 2014 .
duck hunt is a shooter video game .
the game is played from a first-person perspective .
it also requires a crt television screen since the zapper gun will not work with lcd or hdtv 's .
each round has a total of ten targets to shoot .
depending on the game mode the player selects before the beginning play , one or two targets will appear on the screen at any given time and the player has three attempts to hit them before they disappear .
the player is required to successfully shoot a minimum number of targets in order to advance to the next round .
the difficulty increases as the player moves to higher rounds .
the player receives points when shooting a target and will also receive bonus points for shooting all ten targets in one round .
" duck hunt " keeps track of the players ' highest score for all games played in a single session .
duck hunt has three different game modes to choose from .
in " game a " and " game b " , the targets are flying ducks in a woodland area , and in " game c " the targets are clay pigeons that are launched away from the player 's perspective into the distance .
in game a , one duck will appear on the screen at a time while in game b two ducks will appear at a time .
a " game a " allows a second player to control the movement of the flying ducks by using a normal nes controller .
the game starts at round 1 .
if the player completes round 99 , he or she will advance to round 0 .
duck hunt was an arcade video game released in 1984 as " vs . duck hunt " .
the console supports two light guns , allowing two players at once .
the player also has 12 ducks / targets per round instead of 10 .
every duck / target that is not hit costs one life .
all the game ends .
after every second round , a bonus stage is played in which ducks can be shot for points as they fly out of the grass .
however , the hunting dog sometimes jumps out , putting himself in the line of fire and creating a distraction .
if the player shoots the dog , the bonus stage immediately ends .
it is based on a 1976 electronic toy version called " beam gun : duck hunt " .
the toy was made by gunpei yokoi and masayuki uemura for nintendo .
it was made by nintendo for the nintendo zapper and the nes .
the game was supervised by takehiro izushi .
the music was composed by hirokazu tanaka .
the game 's music was in the classic games medley on the video games live concert tour .
designer hiroji kiyotake created the graphics and characters .
" duck hunt " has been placed in several cartridges .
in the action set configuration of the nes in the late 1980s , " duck hunt " was included with " super mario bros . " .
a power set was also available , which included the action set , the power pad and a 3-in-1 cartridge that included " duck hunt " , " world class track meet " , and " super mario bros . "
duck hunt was re-released as a virtual console for the wii u in japan on december 24,2014 , and internationally on december 25,2014 .
this version requires a wii remote controller in place of the nes zapper to aim and shoot targets on the screen .
all game calls the game an " attractive but repetitive target shooter " and " utterly mindless . . the game is fun for a short time , but gets old after a few rounds of play " .
many user groups have said that the game is positively .
1up . com users gave it an 8.7 out of 10 , and the gamespot community gave the mario-duck hunt package a 9.1 out of 10 .
it was ranked the 150th best game made on a nintendo system in nintendo power 's top 200 games list .
ign rated the game at # 77 on their top 100 nes games of all time .
jeremy parish of " usgamer " said that " duck hunt " paired with the nes zapper " made the nes memorable " and was one of the key factors behind the success of the nes .
parish related " duck hunt " to the wii remote of the wii in that they made their respective consoles more approachable and reach a wider demographic .
the game features a nameless non-playable hunting dog , known simply as " dog " according to his collectable trophy in " super smash bros . for wii u " .
the dog accompanies the player in the game a and game b mode .
the dog is infamous and iconic for laughing at the player whenever the player fails to shoot any of the ducks on screen .
many people have said that the dog was able to shoot the dog .
both ign and " nintendo power " have said the dog was something players " love to hate " .
the dog 's perceived " smugness " has helped him appear on several " best of " lists .
in their lists for " top 10 video game dogs " , 1up . com placed the dog seventh .
gamedaily and official nintendo magazine have included the dog in their " greatest video game moments " lists .
brian crecente of kotaku said that kotaku was one of his favorite video game dogs .
mastiff talked about the dog in promoting their video game " remington great american bird hunt " .
ugo . com said that the ability to kill the dog is one of the best video game urban legends .
the dog makes a cameo appearance in the nes game " barker bill 's trick shooting " .
in " wii play " , the sequel " duck hunt " and " hogan 's alley " are included in the mini-games " shooting range " and " trigger twist " in which some of the various targets are ducks and cans .
in the 2014 fighting games " super smash bros . for nintendo 3ds and wii u " , the dog and one of the ducks appear collectively as playable characters under the name " duck hunt " , or " duck hunt duo " in pal releases .
masahiro sakurai , the games ' director , said that " duck hunt " 's commercial success as " the most-sold shooting game in the world " was one of the main reasons for the team 's inclusion .
in the games , the duck hunt team uses several attacks related to the nes zapper , including throwing clay pigeons .
the games have an unlockable " duck hunt "-themed " -lrb- " duck hunt " -rrb- stage .
both the duck hunt team and stage reappear in " super smash bros .
ultimate " , and the team will be featured in the june 2019 trailer announcing banjo and kazooie as downloadable content for ultimate .
in the 2015 sony film " pixels " , the dog has a cameo appearance , where he is given as a " trophy " by the aliens .
he stays in the house of an old woman in london .
the game 's premise is based on the horror vr game duck season .
