a sex organroller is any part of an animal 's body that is involved in sexual reproduction .
the reproductive organs are the same as the reproductive organs .
the testis in the male , and the ovary in the female , are the primary sex organs .
the external sex organs -lrb- the genitalia -rrb- are visible at birth in both sexes .
mosses , ferns , and some similar plants have gametangia for reproductive organs , which are part of the gametophyte .
the flowers of flowering plants produce pollen and egg cells , but the sex organs themselves are inside the pollen and the ovule .
coniferous plants produce their sexually reproductive structures within the cones and pollen .
the caterpillars and pollen are not sexual organs .
the latin term " genitalia " is used to describe the externally visible sex organs : in male mammals , the penis and scrotum ; and in female mammals , the vulva and its organs .
the genitals and the internal organs are the " secondary sex organs " .
the primary sex organs are the gonads , a pair of sex organs , specifically the testes in the male or the ovaries in the female .
the primary sex organs produce reproductive gametes with inheritable dna .
they also produce most of the primary hormones that affect sexual development , and regulate other sexual organs and sexually differentiated behaviors .
in general zoology , given the great variety in organs , physiologies , and behaviors involved in copulation , male genitalia are defined as " all male structures that are inserted in the female or that hold her near her gonopore during sexual transfer " .
the visible portion of the mammalian genitals is made up of the scrotum and penis .
in placental mammals , females have two genitals , the vagina and urethra , while males have only one urethra .
the male and female genitals have many nerve endings , resulting in pleasurable and highly sensitive touch .
in most human societies , especially in conservative ones , exposure of the genitals is considered a public indecency .
in the prenatal development , sex organs originate from a common primordium during early gestation and differentiate into male or female sexes .
sry gene is usually located on the y chromosome and encoding the testis determining factor .
the absence of the ovaries allows the gonads to continue to develop into ovaries .
after that , the development of the internal , and external reproductive organs is determined by hormones produced by hormones produced by ovaries or testes lille and the cells ' response to them .
the first appearance of the fetal genitalia looks basically feminine .
if the testicles produce testosterone , and if the cells of the genitals respond to the testosterone , the outer urogenital folds swell and fuse in the midline to produce the scrotum .
each sex organ in one sex has a homologous counterpart in the other one .
the list of homologues of the human reproductive system includes a list of the most important female reproductive organs .
secondary sexual characteristics are patterns of pubic and facial hair and female breasts that emerge at puberty .
differences in brain structure occur , affecting , but not absolutely determining , behavior .
intersex is the development of the genitalia .
once the child is born , the parents are faced with decisions that are often difficult to make .
some parents can choose their doctors .
if they decide to change the sex organs , they have about 50 % chance of getting genitalia that will match the child 's gender identity .
if the child may have symptoms of transsexualism , which can lead them to a life of discomfort until they can remedy the issue .
in many other animals , a single posterior orifice , called the cloaca , is the only opening for the reproductive , digestive , and urinary tracts .
all amphibians , birds , reptiles , fish , and a few mammals mammals mammals mammals mammals mammals mammalsiculate monotremes , tenrecs , golden moles , and marsupial moles use this orifice .
excretory systems with analogous purpose in some invertebrates are also sometimes referred to as cloacae .
the organs concerned with insect mating and the deposition of eggs are known collectively as the external genitalia .
the reproductive system of gastropods ashore and snails varies greatly from one group to another .
planaria are flat worms used in biology .
sexual planaria is the opposite of planaria .
they have both testicles and ovaries .
each planarian transports its excretion to the other planarian , giving and receiving sperm .
the life cycle of plants is a process in which plants have a gametophyte .
the cell produces reproduction and reproduction .
the sporophyte produces spores by meiosis .
any sex organs that are produced by the plant will develop on the gametophyte .
the seed plants , which include conifers and flowering plants , have small gametophytes that develop inside the pollen grains requesting male births and the ovuleminating female .
sexual reproduction in flowering plants involves the union of the male and female germ cells , sperm and egg cells .
pollen is produced in stamens , and is carried to the pistil , which has the ovary at its base where fertilization can take place .
within each pollen grain is a male gametophyte .
in most flowering plants the female gametophyte within the ovule has only seven cells .
there are no sex organs .
