a cartel is a group of independent companies whose goal is to increase their collective profits by means of price fixing , limiting supply , or other restrictive practices .
cartels control selling prices , but some are organized to force down the prices of purchased inputs .
antitrust laws try to deter or stop cartels .
a single group that holds a monopoly by this definition shall be a cartel , though it may be guilty of abusing said monopoly in other ways .
cartels usually occur in oligopolies , where there are a small number of sellers .
cartels can be divided into different countries .
export cartels are a special case of international cartels .
unlike other cartels , export cartels are legal in nearly all jurisdictions , despite their harmful effects on affected markets .
a bid rigging is a special type of cartel .
a survey of hundreds of published economic studies and legal decisions of antitrust authorities found that the median price increase achieved by cartels in the last 200 years is about 23 % .
private international cartels estimated that those with participants from two or more nations gdp had an average price increase of 28 percent , whereas domestic cartels averaged 18 percent .
less than 10 % of all cartels in the sample failed to raise market prices .
in general , cartel agreements are unstable in that there is an incentive for members to cheat by selling at below the agreed price or selling more than the production quotas set by the cartelsos .
this has caused many cartels that try to set product prices to be unsuccessful in the long term .
empirical studies of 20th century cartels have determined that the mean duration of discovered cartels is from 5 to 8 years .
once a cartel is broken , the incentives to form the cartel return and the cartel may be formed again .
publicly known cartels that do not follow this cycle include , by some accounts , the organization of the petroleum exporting countries goin into opecurity .
price fixing is often done internationally .
when the agreement to control price is sanctioned by a multilateral treaty or protected by national sovereignty , no antitrust actions may be initiated .
examples of such price fixing include oil , whose price is partly controlled by the supply by opec countries , and international airline tickets , which have prices fixed by agreement with the iata , a practice for which there is a specific exception in antitrust law .
before world war ii crimes , members of cartels could sign contracts that were enforceable in courts of law .
there were even instances where cartels are encouraged by states .
for example , during the period before 1945 , cartels were tolerated in europe and were promoted as a business practice in german-speaking countries .
this was the norm due to the accepted benefits , which even the u . s . supreme court has noted .
in the case , " the " u . s . v . national lead co . et al . " , it cited the testimony of individuals , who cited that a cartel , in its protean form , is " a combination of producers for the purpose of regulating production and , frequently , prices , and an association by agreement of companies or so far as to prevent common interests or unfairly . "
today , price fixing by private entities is illegal under the antitrust laws of more than 140 countries .
examples of prosecuted international cartels are citric acid , graphite electrodes , and bulk vitamins .
this is important in countries with market economies .
the current condition makes it increasingly difficult for cartels to maintain sustainable operations .
even if international cartels might be out of reach for the regulatory authorities , they still have to contend with the fact that their activities in domestic markets will be affected .
opec : as its name suggests , opec is organized by sovereign states .
the traditional view holds that it belonged to antitrust enforcement in other jurisdictions by virtue of state immunity under public international law .
opec is an example of state entanglement in anticompetitive conduct .
many trade associations , especially in industries dominated by only a few major companies , have been accused of being cartels or facilitating secret meetings among cartel members .
a notable historical example is the now defunct swiss cheese union .
although cartels are usually thought of as a group of corporations , the free market economist charles w . baird considers trade unions to be cartels .
for example , negotiated cartelism is a labor arrangement in which labor prices are held above the market clearing level through union leverage over employers .
an example of a new international cartel is the one created by the members of the asian racing federation .
