emperor koanzong [unk] 安 天 皇 , koan-tennoguchi prefecture -lrb- [unk] [unk] 日 子 国 [unk] 人 [unk] 人 [unk] 人 [unk] 人 -rrb- , also known as yamatotarashihikokunioshihito no mikoto , was the sixth emperor of japan , according to the traditional order of succession .
very little is known about this emperor .
historians consider emperor koan to be a legendary person .
nothing exists in the kojiki except his name and genealogy .
koan 's reign allegedly began in 392 bc , and had one wife and two sons .
one of his sons was the next emperor .
emperor koan is traditionally accepted as the last emperor of the jomon period , which ended in 300 bc .
only his name and genealogy were recorded .
the imperial " misasagi " or tomb for koan is currently maintained .
he is believed to be the son of emperor kosho .
the " kojiki " records koan was the second son of emperor kosho .
koan was an emperor who reigned for more than a hundred years .
he allegedly had a wife named yosotarashi-hime .
koan 's reign lasted from 392 bc until his death in 291 bc .
the existence of the first nine emperors is not certain .
historians consider emperor koan to be the fifth of eight emperors without legends associated with them .
the name koan "-tenno " was given to him posthumously by later generations .
this emperor 's official name after his death -lrb- his posthumous name -rrb- was regularized many centuries after the lifetime which was ascribed to koan .
one topic that has been brought up is emperor koan 's longevity as the oldest verified humans usually go into the late 110s .
according to historian john s . brownlee , koan 's age of 137 at the time of his death is " too long " .
brownlee goes on to say that while this is not unusual for mythical figures , nobody in japan was bothered by the longevity of the former emperors until the modern era .
the actual site of his grave is not known .
the imperial household agency designates this location as koan 's mausoleum .
the first emperor that historians state might have actually existed is emperor sujin , the 10th emperor of japan .
outside of the kojiki , the reign of emperor kimmei aarhus 509 – 571 adhesion is the first for which contemporary historiography is able to assign verifiable dates .
the conventionally accepted names and dates of the early emperors were not confirmed as traditional .
empress oshi-hime prefecture , prince amatarashikunioshihito 's daughterboats emperor kosho 's son warmly .
