a liqueur is a sweet alcoholic drink .
they are usually served with dessert or dessert .
liqueurs are traditional descendants of herbal medicines .
they were made in italy as early as the 13th century .
they are commonly served straight , over ice , with coffee , in cocktails , and used in cooking .
in some parts of the united states and canada liqueurs are also referred to as cordials or schnapps .
the word " liqueur " comes from the latin " liquifacere " , which means " to dissolve " .
in some parts of the united states and canada , liqueurs are sometimes called cordials .
this can cause confusion as in the united kingdom a cordial would refer to a non-alcoholic concentrated fruit syrup .
schnapps can refer to any distilled beverage in germany and aquavit in scandinavian countries .
in the united states and canada , where spirits are often called " liquor " , there is often confusion between liqueurs and liquors .
liqueurs generally contain a lower alcohol content — 15 – 30 % alcohol content — and it has sweetener mixed , while some can have an abv as high as 55 % .
under the food and drug regulations regulations regulations regulations , c . 870 kilograms -lrb- c . 870 kilograms -rrb- , liqueurs are produced from mixing alcohol with plant materials .
these materials include juices from fruits , flowers , leaves or other plant materials .
the extracts are obtained by soaking , filtering or softening the plant substances .
a sweetening agent should be added in an amount that is at least 2.5 percent of the finished liqueur .
the alcohol percentage shall be at least 23 % .
it may also contain natural or artificial flavouring and color .
the alcohol and tobacco tax and trade bureau regulates liqueurs similarly to canada .
some liqueurs are prepared by infusing fruit , fruit , or flowers in either water or alcohol and adding sugar or other items .
others are distilled from aromatic or flavoring agents .
the oil of anise remains in solution in solution when there is a high concentration of alcohol .
liqueurs are sometimes mixed into cocktails to provide flavor .
layered drinks are made by using different-colored liqueurs in different layers .
each liqueur is poured into a glass over the back of a spoon or down a glass rod .
