late 27th century bc banco nero was an egyptian chancellor to the pharaoh djoser , probable architect of the djoser 's step pyramid , and high priest of the sun god ra at heliopolis .
after imhotep 's death , he was a great author of wisdom books and medical doctor .
it appears that this libation to imhotep was regularly , as they are attested on papyri associated with statues of imhotep until the late period eisenhower .
to alan gardiner , this cult is so different from the offerings usually made to commoners that the epithet of " demi-god " is likely justified to describe the way imhotep was venerated in the new kingdom during the year 1550-1077 bc .
he was one of only two commoners ever to be deified after death ; the other being amenhotep , son of hapuzong .
his cult was in memphis .
imhotep 's historicity is confirmed by two contemporary inscriptions made during his lifetime on the base or pedestal of one of djoser 's statueswalk cairo je 4989999 manet .
the latter inscription suggests that imhotep outlived djoser by a few years and went on to serve in the construction of king sekhemkhet 's pyramid , which was abandoned due to this ruler 's brief reign .
he may have also been responsible for the first known use of stone columns to support a building .
he became the god of medicine and healing .
he was eventually equated with thoth , the god of architecture , mathematics , and medicine , and patron of scribes .
he was revered in the region of thebes as the " brother " of amenhotep , son of hapu , another deified architect , in the temples dedicated to thoth .
she was revered as a demi-goddess as the daughter of banebdjedet .
his mother was sekhmet , the patron of upper egypt whose consort was ptah .
one of his priests explained the connection between the god khnum and the rise of the nile to the king , who then had a dream in which the nile god spoke to him , promising to end the drought .
a demotic papyrus from the temple of tebtunis , dating to the 2nd century a . d . , preserves a long story about imhotep .
king djoser plays a prominent role in the story , which also mentions imhotep 's family .
part of the legend includes an anachronistic battle between the old kingdom and the assyrian armies where imhotep fights an assyrian sorceress in a duel of magic .
in the ptolemaic period , the egyptian priest and historian manetho credited him with inventing the method of a stone-dressed building during djoser 's reign , though he was not the first to actually build with stone .
stone walling , flooring , lintels , and jambs had appeared sporadically during the archaic period .
egyptologist james peter allen states that " the greeks equated him with their own god of medicine , asklepios , although ironically there is no evidence that imhotep himself was a physician . "
