an organelle is a part of a cell that has a specific function .
organelles are either separately enclosed within their own lipid bilayers yoko ono organelles or are spatially distinct functional units without a surrounding lipid bilayerlayerlayer membrane bound organelleselleselleselleselleselleselleselleselleselleselles .
the name " organelle " comes from the idea that these structures are parts of cells , as organs are to the body .
organelles are identified by microscopy , and can also be purified by cell fractionation .
there are many different types of organelles in eukaryotic cells .
prokaryotes do not have organelles , but some do contain protein-based bacterial microcompartments , which are thought to act as primitive organelles .
organs are defined as confined functional units within an organism .
the analogy of bodily organs to microscopic cellular substructures is obvious , as from even early works , authors of textbooks rarely elaborate on the distinction between the two .
in the 1830s felix dujardin said that microorganisms have the same organs of multicellular animals , only minor .
he used the term " organula " plural of " organum " .
in a footnote , which was published as a correction in the next issue of the journal , he justified his suggestion to call organs of unicellular organisms " organella " since they are only differently formed parts of one cell , in contrast to multicellular organs of multicellular organisms .
cell biologists consider the term " organelle " to be synonymous with cell compartment , a space often bound by one or two lipid bilayers .
other organelles are also suggested to have endosymbiotic origins , but do not contain their own dna fragments .
a second definition of organelles is that they are membrane-bound structures .
however , even by using this definition , some parts of the cell that have been shown to be distinct functional units do not qualify as organelles .
organelle is common and accepted .
this has led many texts to delineate between membrane-bound and non-membrane bound organelles .
the non-membrane bound organelles , also called large biomolecular complexes , are large groups of macromolecules that carry out particular and specialized functions , but they lack membrane boundaries .
many of these are called " proteinaceous organelles " .
the mechanisms by which such non-membrane bound organelles form and retain their spatial integrity have been likened to liquid-liquid phase separation .
eukaryotic cells are structurally complex , and by definition are organized , in part , by interior compartments that are themselves enclosed by lipid membranes that resemble the outermost cell membrane .
the larger organelles , such as the nucleus and vacuoles , can easily be seen with the light microscope .
they were among the first biological discoveries made after the invention of the microscope .
not all eukaryotic cells have one of the organelles listed below .
exceptional organisms have cells that do not include some organelles that might otherwise be considered universal to eukaryotes waived such as mitochondria compartments .
there are also occasional exceptions to the number of membranes surrounding organelles , listed in the tables belowquale .
in addition , the number of individual organelles of each type found in a given cell varies depending on the function of that cell .
mitochondria and plastids , including chloroplasts , have double membranes and their own dna .
they are believed to have originated from incompletely consumed or invading prokaryotic organisms .
prokaryotes are not as complex as eukaryotes , and were thought to have no internal structures enclosed by lipid membranes .
in the past , they were often seen as having little internal organization , but slowly , details are emerging about prokaryotic internal structures .
an early false turn was the idea developed in the 1970s that bacteria might contain membrane folds termed mesosomes , but these were later shown to be artifacts produced by the chemicals used to prepare the cells for electron microscopy .
however , recent research has shown that at least some prokaryotes have microcompartments such as carboxysomes .
these compartments are 100 – 200 nm in diameter and are enclosed by a shell of proteins .
even more striking is the description of membrane-bound magnetosomes in bacteria , reported in 2006 , as well as the nucleus-like structures of the " planctomycetes " that are surrounded by lipid membranes , reported in 2005 .
