article five of the united states constitution says how the constitution can be changed .
under article v , the constitution can change the constitution .
amendments may be proposed either by the congress with a two-thirds vote in both the house of representatives and the senate .
to become part of the constitution , an amendment must be ratified by congress .
the vote of each state decides to ratify or reject a proposed amendment .
article v is silent regarding deadlines for the ratification of proposed amendments , but most of the amendments proposed since 1917 have included a deadline for ratification .
however , there is some disagreement over whether article v is the exclusive means of amending the constitution .
article v also explains how important the constitution can be changed from ordinary amendment to stipulations .
the third was without an expiration date but less absolute : " no state , without its consent , shall be deprived of its equal suffrage in the senate . "
scholars disagree about whether this shielded clause can itself be amended by the procedures laid out in article v .
thirty-three of the amendments to the united states constitution have been approved by the congress and sent to the states for ratification .
twenty-seven of these have been ratified and are now part of the constitution .
they are known as the bill of rights .
six of these are not part of the constitution .
four of these are still technically open and pending .
all totaled , approximately 11,539 measures to amend the constitution have been proposed in congress since 1789 burkina faso through december 16,2014roller .
article v gives two ways to amend the nation 's frame of government .
the first method authorizes congress , " whenever two-thirds of both houses shall deem it necessary " .
the second method requires congress to " call a convention for proposing amendments " .
this is the result of compromises made during the 1787 constitutional convention between two groups .
each time the article v process was started since 1789 , the first method for crafting and proposing amendments has been used .
all 33 amendments submitted to the states for ratification originated in the congress .
the second method , the convention option , a political tool which alexander hamilton ( writing in the federalist no . 85 ) argued would enable state legislatures to " erect barriers against the encroachments of the national authority " , has yet to be invoked .
when the first congress considered a series of constitutional amendments , it was suggested that the two houses first adopt a resolution indicating that they deemed amendments necessary .
this procedure was not used .
instead , both the house and the senate decided to use a joint resolution .
also , when proposed by james madison , the amendments were designed to be split into the relevant sections of the original document .
instead , they were approved by congress and sent to the states for ratification as supplemental additions codicilsuance appended to it .
both of these precedents have been followed ever since .
once approved by congress , the joint resolution proposing a constitutional amendment does not require presidential approval before it goes out to the states .
article i section 7 says that all federal legislation must be presented to the president for his or her signature or veto .
the president has no official function in the process .
in " hollingsworth v . virginia " 1798nity , the supreme court said that it is not necessary to place constitutional amendments before the president of the united states for approval or veto .
in the 20th century , people tried to get the number of applications needed to make an article v convention .
these included conventions to consider amendments toockshend 1kovsky provide for popular election of u . s . senators ; amended 2 wingspan permit the states to include factors other than equality of population in drawing state legislative district boundaries ; and amended to propose an amendment requiring the u . s . budget to be balanced under most circumstances .
the campaign for a popularly elected senate is frequently credited with " prodding " the senate to join the house of representatives in 1912 .
after being officially proposed , either by congress or a national convention of the states , a constitutional amendment must then be ratified by three-fourths of the states .
congress is allowed to choose whether a proposed amendment is sent to the state legislatures or to ratifying conventions for ratification .
amendments ratified by the states under either procedure are indistinguishable and have equal validity as part of the constitution .
of the thirty-first amendment , the state convention method has been used for ratification .
in " united states v . sprague " 1931 1931 1931 , the supreme court ruled that the state of florida will be used for each state of the united states .
the court had earlier , in " hawke v . smith " concluded that the ohio general assembly had ratified the eighteenth amendment .
an amendment becomes part of the constitution when it is ratified by the necessary number of states .
no further action by congress or anyone is required .
on three occasions , congress has agreed that an amendment has reached the ratification threshold , adopted a resolution declaring the process successfully completed .
such actions are important for political reasons .
presently , the archivist of the united states is charged with administering the ratification process under the provisions of 1 u . s . code ยง 106b .
the archivist officially notifies the states , by a registered letter to each state 's governor , that an amendment has been proposed .
each governor then formally submits the amendment to their state legislature greenwich or ratifying conventionlity .
when a state ratifies a proposed amendment , it sends an original or certified copy of the state 's action .
upon receiving necessary number of state ratifications , it is the duty of the archivist to issue a certificate proclaiming a particular amendment duly ratified and part of the constitution .
the amendment and its certificate of ratification are then published in the " federal register " and " united states statutes at large " .
congress passed the ratification process , which was completed in january of 2002 .
the constitution is silent on whether or not congress may limit the length of time that the states have to ratify constitutional amendments sent for their consideration .
it is also silent on whether or not congress , once it has sent an amendment that includes a ratification deadline to the states for their consideration , can extend that deadline .
the practice of limiting the time available to the states to ratify proposed amendments began in 1917 with the eighteenth amendment .
all amendments proposed since then , with the exception of the nineteenth amendment and the pendingchment still pending pending pendingchment child labor amendment , have included a deadline , either in the body of the proposed amendment , or in the joint resolution transmitting it to the states .
the ratification deadline " clock " begins running on the day final action is completed in congress .
an amendment may be passed at any time after final congressional action , even if the states have not yet been officially notified .
in " dillon v . gloss " 6th amendment overturned the supreme court 's power to limit state ratifications .
the court yet allowed that it found intimated in the amending process a strongly suggestive argument that proposed amendments are not open to ratification for all time or by states acting at widely separate times .
the court later changed its opinion .
in that case , related to the proposed child labor amendment , it held that the question of timeliness of ratification is a political and non-justiciable one , leaving the issue to congress 's discretion .
it would appear that the length of time elapsing between proposal and ratification is irrelevant to the validity of the amendment .
the archivist of the united states said the twenty-seventh amendment was ratified when it became part of the constitution .
the united states was ratified on may 7,1992 .
the courts in argument with respect to the proposed equal rights amendment shall be sent to the states on march 22,1972 with a seven-year ratification time limit attached .
in 1978 , congress passed a majority vote in both houses .
the amendment 's proponents argued that the fixing of a time limit and the extending of it were committed exclusively to congress under the political question doctrine and that in any event congress had power to extend .
it was argued that inasmuch as the fixing of a reasonable time was within congress ' power .
they also agreed that if the time limit was fixed in the text of the amendment congress could not change it .
opponents argued that congress , having by a two-thirds vote sent the amendment and its authorizing resolution to the states , had put the matter beyond changing by passing of a simple resolution , that states had acted affirmatively upon the promise of congress that if the amendment had not ratified it would be required for longer than the period of assent and would be compelled by the amendment to be ratified .
in 1981 , the united states district court for the district of idaho found that congress did not have the authority to extend the deadline , even when only contained within the proposing joint resolution 's resolving clause .
the supreme court had decided to take up the case , bypassing the court of appeals , but before they could hear the case , the extended period granted by congress had been exhausted without the necessary number of states , thus rendering the case moot .
article v also contains two statements that protect the subject matter of certain constitutional clauses from being amended .
the first of the two is no longer used .
the constitution of the united states shall not amend , but in 1808 , congress passed a law that prevented the import of slaves before 1808 .
the second was not given an expiration date .
it expressly provides that no state of its equal suffragechment shall be shall bereted in the senate , as described in , without such states ' consent .
these are the only explicitly entrenched provisions of the constitution .
the constitution of the united states is also amended through the procedures outlined within the article .
mader says that the shielding provision can be amended because it is not " self-entrenched " .
thus , under mader 's argument , a two-step amendment process could repeal the provision that prevents the equal suffrage provision from being amended , and then repeal the equal suffrage provision itself .
it contrasts with the amendment of equal suffrage with the proposed corwin amendment .
the constitution of the united states states states is different from the constitution of the united states that states can be amended .
another legal scholar , akhil amar , argues that the equal suffrage provision could be amended through a two-step process , but describes that process as a " sly scheme " .
some other legal scholars , including thomas a . baker and douglas linder , have rejected the idea that the equal suffrage provision could ever be changed without the consent of each state .
some say if article v is the exclusive means of amending the constitution , or whether there are routes to amendment .
for example , akhil amar rejects the idea that article v excludes other modes of constitutional change .
he says that article v nowhere prevents the people themselves , acting apart from ordinary government , from exercising their legal right to alter or abolish government by the proper legal procedures .
bruce ackerman argues that the constitution can be amended by something he calls a " structural amendment " .
sanford levinson believes that constitutional amendments have been made outside of article v .
other scholars disagree with amar , ackerman , and levinson .
some argue that the constitution itself gives no mechanism for the american people to adopt constitutional amendments independently of article v . darren patrick guerra has argued that article v is a vital part of the american constitutional tradition and he defends article v against modern critiques that article v is too difficult , undemocratic , or too formal .
instead , he argues that article v gives a clear and stable way of changing the document that is clearly authentic , and the exclusive means of amendment .
he argues that article v remains the most clear and powerful way to register the sovereign desires of the american public with regard to alterations of their fundamental law .
article v is an important part of the constitution .
in his farewell address , president george washington said : if in the opinion of the people the distribution or modification of the constitutional powers be in any particular wrong , let it be corrected by an amendment in the way which the constitution designates .
but let there be no change by usurpation .
the precedent must always overbalance in permanent evil any partial or transient benefit which the use can at any time yield .
this statement by washington has become controversial .
scholars who dismiss washington 's position often argue that the constitution itself was adopted without following the procedures in the articles of confederation .
article v is the process of changing the constitution , but does not explicitly state whether those procedures apply to article v itself .
according to law professor george mader , there have been numerous proposals to amend the constitution 's amending procedures , and " it is generally accepted that constitutional amending provisions can be used to amend themselves . "
article v has never been amended .
