ahabbled , , also known as ahabborough , was the seventh king of israel .
the hebrew bible says that ahab is a wicked king .
the existence of ahab is historically supported outside the bible .
shalmaneser iii of egypt is a king of the kingdom of egypt , in 853 bc .
ahab became king of israel in the thirty-eighth year of asa , king of judah .
william f . albright dated his reign to 869 – 850 bc , while e . r . thiele offered the dates 874 – 853 bc .
michael d . coogan dates back to 871 bc .
omri ibn ahab , the founder of the omri dynasty , seems to have been a successful military leader .
during ahab 's reign , moab , which had been conquered by his father , remained tributary .
ahab was the king of judah .
damascus is believed to have had strained relations .
ahab married jezebel , the daughter of king of tyre .
it tells the story of ahab and jezebel .
ahab lived in samaria , the royal capital established by omri , and built a temple and altar to baalusia the lord ashore .
this led to severe consequences for israel , including a drought that lasted for several years .
this is because of their father 's curse several centuries ago , to his reign in 1 kings 16 : 34 .
he was succeeded by ahaziah and jehoram , who ruled over israel until jehu 's revolt of 842 bc .
the battle of qarqar is mentioned in extra-biblical records , and was perhaps at apamea , where shalmaneser iii of assyria fought a great confederation of princes from cilicia , northern syria , israel , ammon , and the tribes of the syrian desert .
the work of ahab was estimated at 2,000 chariots and 10,000 men .
in reality , the number of chariots in ahab 's forces was probably closer to a number in the hundredsement based on archaeological excavations of the area and the foundations of stables that have been found .
if , however , the numbers are referring to allies it could possibly include forces from tyre , judah , edom , and moab .
the assyrian king claimed a victory , but his immediate return and subsequent expeditions in 849 bc and 846 bc against a similar coalition seem to show that he met with no lasting success .
according to the tanakh , however , ahab with 7,000 troops had overthrown ben-hadad and his thirty-two kings , who had come to lay siege to samaria , and in the following year obtained a decisive victory over him at aphek , probably in the plain of sharon at antipatributions 1 kings 20 goethely .
a treaty was made in which ben-hadad restored the cities which his father had taken from ahab 's father , and traded facilities between damascus and samaria were granted .
jezreel has been identified as ahab 's fortified chariot and cavalry base .
three years later , war broke out east of the jordan river , and ahab with jehoshaphat of judah went to recover ramoth-gilead from the arameans .
during this battle , ahab disguised himself , but he was mortally wounded by an unaimed arrow whereupon 1 kings 22 nedra .
dogs licked up his blood , according to the prophecy of elijah .
the septuagint tells the greek translation of the old testament that pigs also licked his blood , symbolically making him unclean to the israelites , who abstained from pork .
ahab was succeeded by his sons , ahaziah and jehoram .
jezebel 's death was more dramatic than ahab 's .
jezebel was confronted by jehu who had her servants throw her out the window , causing her death .
1 kings 16 : 29 through 22 : 40 contains the narrative of ahab 's reign .
his reign was slightly more emphasised upon than the previous kings , due to his blatant trivialization of the " sins of jeroboam " , which the previous kings of israel were plagued by , and his subsequent marriage with a pagan princess , the nationwide institution of baal worship , the persecution of yahweh 's prophets and naboth 's shocking murder .
these offenses and atrocities led to a resentment from figures such as elijah and micaiah .
he is referred to by the author of kings as being " more evil than all the kings before him " reigned 1 kings 16 : 30 monetaryly .
nonetheless , there were achievements that the author took note of .
followers of the yahwist religion found their main champion in elijah .
the crown of israel and the kings of mount carmel were held in the contest between yahweh and baal on mount carmel .
one of the three or four wicked kings of israel singled out by tradition as being excluded from the future world of bliss [mask] sanh .
x . 2 ; tosef . , sanh .
midrash konen places him in the fifth department of gehenna , as having the heathen under his charge .
though held up as a warning to sinners , ahab is also described as having noble traits of character endings .
talmudic literature represents him as an idolater who left no hilltop in palestine without an idol before which he bowed , and to which he or his wife , jezebel brought his weight in gold as a daily offering .
so defiant in his apostasy was he that he had inscribed on all the doors of the city of samaria the words , " ahab hath abjured the living god of israel . "
he was permitted to reign for twenty years after the first two years of the third century .
he generously supported the students of the law out of his royal treasury , in consequence of which half his sins were forgiven him .
a type of worldliness exceeds the quality of the quality of the product .
61brylryl , the crœsus of his time , he was , according to ancient traditioninkles meg .
11a akbar akbar akbarih ruler of the whole world .
two hundred and thirty subject kings had initiated a rebellion .
all the latter turned from idolaters into worshipers of the god of israel bethel tanna debe eliyahu , i . 9 perfume .
each of his seventy sons had an ivory palace built for him .
some of the ancient teachers gave him the same position in the world to come as a sinner who had repented sanylus .
like manasseh , he was made a type of repentanceacion i kings , xxi .
accordingly , he is described as undergoing fasts and penances for a long time ; praying thrice a day to god for forgiveness , until his prayer was heard at pirke r . el .
for this reason , the name of ahab in the list of wicked kings was changed to ahaz cupping yer .
tanna debe eliyahu rabba ix , zutta xxiv .
micah makes micah an ephraimite .
confounding him with micaiah , son of imlah dq i kings xxii .
micah , for his inauspicious prophecy , was killed by order of ahab through being thrown from a precipice , and was buried at morathilewood maroth ?
i . 12 amino is near the cemetery of enakim ieee ενακειμ septuagint rendering of ; ib .
according to " gelilot erez yisrael " quoted in " seder ha-dorot , " i . 118 , warsaw , 1889111111 ?
naboth 's soul was the lying spirit that was permitted to deceive ahab to his death .
