in 2001 , to save the team from folding , minardi sold it to australian businessman paul stoddart .
from 2001 , all of minardi chassis are called " ps " .
during its time in f1 , the team scored a total of 38 championship points .
martini also recorded the team 's only front row start , qualifying 2nd at the united states grand prix , and he led a lap during the 1989 portuguese grand prix .
on the track , their cars were considered by many as well-designed for their tiny budget .
giovanni minardi competed in his own cars in the late 1940s .
after his death , giancarlo took over the racing part of the family business .
martini sr . qualified 15th for the race of champions at brands hatch but failed to start the race after an accident during the opening lap .
the team was first at the minardi name in the 1980 european formula two championship .
instead of using a customer chassis , the team commissioned a bmw powered design from giacomo caliri 's fly studios .
minardi left the formula two division at the end of 1984 .
in 1984 , minardi entered formula one .
when engineer carlo chiti left alfa romeo to found motori moderni , minardi became the only customer for his new v6 engine design .
the engine was not ready for the start of the season .
driver pierluigi martini finished only two races .
in 1989 , minardi changed to cosworth .
the team was moderately successful in the midfield through the late 1980s and early 1990s .
he was the first driver to finish in the united states grand prix , in the 1988 united states grand prix .
in 1992 minardi became the first team in modern times to make use of customer engines from ferrari .
bernie ecclestone spoke to flavio briatore , who agreed to buy a share in the team in 1995 .
in 1996 italian businessman gabriele rumi switched his sponsorship support to minardi .
he became the co-owner and chairman of the team .
pedro lamy scored his one and only point in formula one with a sixth place in the australian grand prix .
luca badoer had been running fourth until his gearbox failed with 13 laps to go , at which point the italian burst into tears next to his stricken car .
other minardi drivers also came close to scoring points .
minardi was known for not using pay drivers .
the team , now near collapse , was purchased by australian businessman paul stoddart in early 2001 .
minardi gave alonso his debut , despite being unable to score any points for minardi .
minardi 's performance at the 2002 australian grand prix ended up to be particularly successful .
the race was stopped after 75 % distance .
stoddart later said that verstappen had enough fuel on board to last until just after the time the red flag was eventually waved , due to the large number of safety car laps .
assuming stoddart is being truthful , verstappen may have won this race had he not spun .
in return , the team principals who would benefit from this would support the factory teams when it came to opposing new rule changes enforced by the fia , such as the proposed ban on traction control .
before the start of the season , stoddart threatened to withdraw his support against the ban on traction control , but later changed his mind .
midway through the 2004 season , the other teams voted to change the unpopular single lap qualifying system back to old 1 hour format , but stoddart voted against because it would also mean the 107 % rule was reintroduced .
before the australian grand prix stoddart threatened to withdraw his cars .
stoddart has also called for the resignation of max mosley , who was the fia 's president .
while minardi had run bridgestone tires , stoddart had offered to compromise with the michelin teams .
baumgartner scored minardi 's first point in more than two years at the united states grand prix .
baumgartner was the first hungarian to score a point in a world championship f1 race .
they amassed a total of 7 points after the debacle of the united states grand prix .
after losing financial support from his sponsors before the german grand prix , patrick friesacher was replaced by dutch jordan test driver robert doornbos .
the drinks manufacturer red bull already owned a formula one team , red bull racing .
on 10 september 2005 red bull announced it would take control of minardi in november and run it as their " rookie team " from 2006 .
the team was renamed scuderia toro rosso for the 2006 season .
the red bull won the race at the italian grand prix .
giancarlo minardi and paul stoddart both use the minardi name in new races .
he also announced that he was licensing the minardi name to team gp racing in the junior euro formula 3000 series , to be entitled ' minardi team by gp racing ' .
the team raced with moderate success , scoring a podium in each leg of the spa round in june 2006 .
on 18 december 2006 , it was confirmed that he had purchased a controlling interest in the cte racing-hvm champ car team .
he finished third in the series .
