it was in the form of a letter in latin submitted to pope john xxii , dated 6 april 1320 .
the declaration was part of a broader diplomatic campaign which sought to claim scotland 's position as an independent kingdom , rather than being a feudal land controlled by england 's norman kings , as well as the excommunication of robert the bruce .
the pope had recognised edward i of england 's claim to overlordship of scotland in 1305 .
the declaration made a number of points : that scotland had always been independent , indeed for longer than england ; that edward i of england had unjustly attacked scotland and perpetrated atrocities ; that robert the bruce delivered the scottish nation from this peril ; and , most controversially , that the independence of scotland was the prerogative of the scottish people , rather than the king of scots .
some interpreted this last point as an early expression of ' popular sovereignty ' .
modern scottish nationalists point to the “ declaration ” as evidence of the long-term persistence of the scots as a distinct national community , giving a very early date for the emergence of nationalism .
the meaning of the word was similar to nation during the ancient and medieval periods was often quite different than it is today .
it has also been argued that the declaration was not a statement of popular sovereignty ; and that its signatories would have had no such concept ; a statement of royal propaganda supporting bruce 's faction .
william wallace and andrew de moray had rebelled against him in 1297 .
the reason given in the declaration is that bruce was able to defend scotland from english aggression .
the idea of a contract between king and people was advanced to the pope as a justification for bruce 's coronation whilst john de balliol was still in papal custody .
there are 39 names — eight earls and thirty one barons — at the start of the document , all of whom may have had their seals appended , probably over the space of some weeks and months , with nobles sending in their seals to be used .
only 19 people are named in the document .
the pope had to wait out the arguments that the pope wanted to get support from the scots for his crusade if they no longer had to fear english invasion .
in october 1328 , the interdict on scotland , and the excommunication of its king , were removed by the pope .
a copy of the declaration survives among scotland 's state papers , held by the national archives of scotland in edinburgh .
the most widely known english translation was made by sir james fergusson , formerly keeper of the records of scotland , from text that he reconstructed using this extant copy and early copies of the original draft .
although it includes several consistent bruce loyalists , it includes others who had opposed bruce , or whom bruce tried for plotting against him a few months later , and others of whom little is known .
in some cases the spelling of names has changed over the years .
the united states declaration of independence was signed on 6 april 1320 .
