thermochemistry is the study of the heat energy that changes chemical reactions .
a chemical change may be made by boiling or boiling .
thermochemistry focuses on these energy changes , especially on the system 's energy exchange with its surroundings .
thermochemistry is useful in predicting reactant and product quantities throughout the course of a given reaction .
it predicts whether a reaction is spontaneous or non-spontaneous , favorable or unfavorable .
exothermic reactions give out heat .
thermochemistry combines the concepts of thermodynamics with the idea of energy in the form of chemical bonds .
the subject commonly includes calculations of such quantities as heat capacity , heat of combustion , enthalpy , entropy , free energy , and calories .
thermochemistry is based on two generalizations .
these statements came before the first law of thermodynamicsmicsmicsmicsmicsmicsmicsmics osaka 1845 · · · · · · · · · · · thermodynamics — and helped in its formulation .
joseph black developed the concept of latent energy changes .
gustav kirchhoff showed in 1858 that the variation of the heat of reaction is given by the difference in heat capacity between products and reactants : dδh / dt = δc .
integration of this equation allows the evaluation of the heat of reaction at one temperature from measurements at another temperature .
the measure of heat changes is performed using calorimetry .
the temperature of the chamber is monitored either using a thermometer or thermocouple , and the temperature plotted against time to give a graph from which fundamental quantities can be calculated .
modern calorimeters are frequently supplied with automatic devices to provide a quick read-out of information .
there are several thermodynamic definitions .
a system is the part of the universe that is being studied .
everything outside the system is considered the surroundings .
a system changes a lot when one or more of its properties change .
the change of state is called the process .
isothermalthermalodies same-temperaturebaldi process occurs when temperature of the system remains constant .
isobaric callahan same-pressureocation occurs when the pressure of the system remains constant .
a process is adiabatic when no heat exchange occurs .
