five-card drawsdale is a poker variant .
as a result , it is often the first variant learned by new players .
it is usually played in home games but rarely played in casino and tournament play .
it is also offered by some online venues .
in casino play the first betting round begins with the player to the left of the big blind , and subsequent rounds begin with the player to the left .
the first betting round is with the player to the dealer 's left .
each player is given five cards face down .
the remaining deck is placed aside .
players pick up the cards and hold them in their hands .
if more than one player stays after the first round , the " draw " phase begins .
each player specifies how many of their cards they wish to replace and discards them .
the deck is retrieved , and each player is given the same number of cards they discarded so that each player again has five cards .
a second " after the draw " betting round is beginning with the player to the dealer 's left or else beginning with the player who opened the first round .
if more than one player remains , the player with the best hand wins the pot .
a common " house rule " in some places is that a player may not replace more than three cards , unless they draw four cards while keeping an acewalk or wild cardocation .
this is useful for low-stakes social games where many players will stay for the draw .
in more serious games such as those played in casinos it is unnecessary and generally not used .
however , a rule used by many casinos is that a player is not allowed to draw five consecutive cards from the deck .
if a player wishes to replace all of their cards , that player is given four of them in turn , the other players are given their draws , and then the dealer returns to that player to give the fifth replacement card .
another common house rule is that the bottom card of the deck is never given as a replacement , to avoid the possibility of someone who might have seen it during the deal using that information .
if the deck is not empty during the draw before all players have received their replacements , the last players can receive cards randomly from one of the players who were thrown by the other .
for example , if the last player to draw wants three new cards , there are only two cards left in the deck , the dealer gives the player the one top card he can give , then shuffles together the bottom card of the deck , the burn card , and the earlier players ' discards .
the sample deal is being played by four players as shown to the right with alice dealing .
all four players ante $ 1 .
alice deals five cards to each player .
bob opens the betting round by betting .
carol folds , david calls , and alice calls , closing the betting round .
bob now declares that he wishes to replace three of his cards , so he removes those three cards from his hand and discards them .
alice deals a burn card , then deals three cards directly to bob , who puts them in his hand .
alice deals one card to him .
alice now discards three of her own cards , and replaces them with three from the top of the deck poker note : in a player-dealt casino game there is often a rule that the dealer must discard before picking up the deck , but this is a home game so we won ' t worry about such details .
now a second betting round begins .
bob checks , david checks , alice bet $ 10 , bob folds , david raises $ 16 , and alice calls , ending the second betting round and going directly into a showdown .
david shows a flush , and alice shows two pair , so david takes the pot .
it is sometimes played with a stripped deck .
it is also known as " seven-to-ace " or " ace-to-seven " .
players can play it up to five .
when four or fewer players play , a normal 32-card deck without jokers , with ranks ranging from ace to seven , is used .
sixes are added to 36 card deck .
the deck has only eight or nine different card ranks , compared to 13 in a standard deck .
this affects the probabilities of making specific hands , so a flush ranks above a full house and below four of a kind .
many smaller online poker rooms , such as boss media , spread the variant .
