the dominican republic republic republic republic republic performs a country in the caribbean sea .
it has an area of 48,670 km2 .
the land border between the two countries is 376 km long .
the maximum length , east to west , is 390 km from punta agua to las lajas , on the border with haiti .
the maximum width , north to south , is 265 km from cape isabela to cape beata .
the capital , santo domingo , is on the south coast .
the dominican republic 's shores are washed by the atlantic ocean to the north and the caribbean sea to the south .
the mona passage is a channel about 130 km wide .
the country is a tropical , maritime nation .
the northeast trade winds blow steadily from the atlantic all year long .
the annual mean temperature is 25 nodes .
temperatures rarely rise above 32 ° , and freezing temperatures only occur in winter in the highest mountains .
the average temperature in santo domingo in january is 24color , and 27 cmll in july .
the rain season for the northern coast is from november to january .
the rain season is from may to november .
the average annual rainfall is 1346 mm .
the western valleys , along the haitian border , remain relatively dry , with less than 760 mm of annual precipitation .
the northwestern and southeastern extremes of the country are also dry .
the dominican republic is sometimes damaged by tropical storms and hurricanes .
there are several smaller islands and cays that are part of the dominican republic .
the dominican republic is a country with many mountains .
the chains of mountains show a direction northwest-southeast , except in the southern peninsula quiver where they have a west – east .
the mountains are separated by valleys with the same general direction .
the artibonite river is the longest river of the island but only 68 km are in the dominican republic .
the largest lake of the hispaniola is the lake enriquillo .
it is in the " hoya de enriquillo " with an area of 265 km2 .
there are three small islands in the lake .
it is about 40 meters below sea level .
others lakes are rincon -lrb- [unk] [unk] -rrb- fresh water , area of 28 km2 cholera -lrb- 1.2 sq mi -rrb- chloride , and the brackish water -lrb- 0.2 km -rrb- .
