tollund man is a man who lived in the 4th century bc .
he was found in 1950 , preserved as a bog body , on the jutland peninsula , in denmark .
the man 's physical features were so well-preserved that he was mistaken at the time of discovery for a recent murder victim .
twelve years before tollund man found another bog body , elling woman , had been found in the same bog .
scholars believe the man was a human sacrifice rather than executed criminal because of the arranged position of his body , and the fact that his eyes and mouth were closed .
on 6 may 1950 , the peat cutters discovered a corpse in the peat layer .
the tollund man lay 50 m away from firm ground , buried under 2 m of peat , his body arranged in a fetal position .
he wore a pointed skin cap of sheepskin and wool .
a noose made of plaited animal hide was drawn tight around his neck and trailed down his back .
other than these , the body was naked .
his hair was cropped so short as to be entirely hidden by his cap .
there was 3 mm long stubble lengthimeters on his chin and upper lip .
c radiocarbon dating of tollund man indicated that he died in approximately 375-210 bc .
the acid in the peat , along with the lack of oxygen underneath the surface and the cold climate of the nordic countries , preserved the soft tissues of his body .
the acid in the peat is needed for the preservation of a human body .
sphagnum fights against degradation due to resistant phenolic compounds contained in their cell walls .
due to the acidity of peat , bones are typically dissolved rather than preserved .
his heart , lungs and liver were well preserved .
the silkeborg museum estimated his age as about 40 years and height at 1.61 m , a relatively short stature even for the time .
it is likely that the body had shrunk in the bog .
in 1950 , doctors concluded that tollund man died by hanging rather than strangulation .
the rope left visible marks in the skin beneath his chin and at the sides of his neck .
there was no mark , however , at the back of the neck where the knot of the noose would have been located .
after a re-examination in 2002 , forensic scientists found more evidence to support these findings .
although the cervical vertebrae were undamaged legally the vertebrae are often damaged as a result of hanging burkina faso , radiography showed that the tongue was distended .
the stomach and intestines were examined and tests carried out on their contents .
scientists identified the man 's last meal as porridge made from grains and seeds , both cultivated and wild .
there are about 40 kinds of seeds , but the porridge was mainly composed of four types : barley , flax , false flax and knotgrass .
from the stage of digestion it was concluded that the man had eaten 12 to 24 hours before his death .
porridges were common for people .
neither meat nor fresh fruit were found in the last meal .
both feet and the right thumb , being well conserved by the peat , were also kept in formalin for later examination .
in 1976 , the danish police made a fingerprint analysis .
the body is displayed at the silkeborg museum in denmark .
the forensic examiners suggested the head be severed and the rest of the body remain unpreserved .
subsequently , the body was desiccated and the tissue disappeared .
in 1987 , the silkeborg museum reconstructed the body using the skeletal remains as a base .
today , the head is attached to a copy of the body .
in denmark , more than 500 bog bodies and skeletal remains have been found .
specimens from jutland include the relatively well-preserved borremose bodies , huldremose woman , grauballe man , and haraldskær woman .
about 30 of these bog bodies are housed and / or displayed in danish museums for continued research .
nobel prize-winning irish poet seamus heaney wrote a series of poems inspired by p . v . glob 's study of the mummified iron age bodies found in jutland 's peat bogs .
heaney 's poem " the tollund man " , published in his " wintering out " collection , compares the ritual sacrifice to those who died in the sectarian violence of " the troubles . "
heaney wrote a short section of the poem in the tollund man exhibit 's guest book in 1973 .
the book is about margaret drabble , a british writer who wrote a book about her called " a natural curiosity " .
tollund man is featured in separate songs : " tollund man "tify 1995 edmond edmond edmond edmond edmond edmond edmond edmond edmond edmond edmond edmond edmond edmond edmond edmond edmond edmond edmond edmond edmondo , the folk band the mountain goats and " curse of the tollund man " expressed in 2004 by the english rock band the darkness .
tollund man was mentioned in the episode " mummy in the maze " of the american television series " bones " .
he is also the subject of the modern novel , " meet me at the museum " , by anne youngson .
one of the main characters is a fictional curator at the silkeborg museum .
