eisenstein was born in riga , latvia .
eisenstein was raised as an orthodox christian , but became an atheist later on .
at this time , he learned about 300 kanji characters .
eisenstein moved to moscow in 1920 .
while critics outside of soviet russia praised these works , eisenstein 's focus in the movies on structural issues such as camera angles , crowd movements , and montage brought him and like-minded others such as vsevolod pudovkin and alexander dovzhenko under fire from the soviet movie community .
in the autumn of 1928 , eisenstein left the soviet union for a tour of europe .
the trip was supposed to allow the three to learn about sound motion pictures and to present themselves as soviet artists in person to the capitalist west .
eisenstein , however , was also a opportunity to see landscapes and cultures outside the soviet union .
in late april 1930 , jesse l . lasky , on behalf of paramount pictures , offered eisenstein the opportunity to make a movie in the united states .
eisenstein proposed a biography of munitions tycoon basil zaharoff and a movie version of " arms and the man " by george bernard shaw .
eisenstein completed a script by the start of october 1930 .
on october 23,1930 , paramount and eisenstein declared their contract canceled .
the soviet movie industry was solving the sound-movie issue without him .
many of his theoretical articles from this period , such as " eisenstein on disney " , have surfaced decades later as seminal scholarly texts used as curriculum in movie schools around the world .
eisenstein spent a lot of time with charlie chaplin .
between the end of october 1930 and thanksgiving of that year , sinclair had secured an extension of eisenstein 's absences from the ussr , and permission for him to travel to mexico .
the trip to mexico was for eisenstein to make a movie produced by sinclair and his wife mary .
on november 24,1930 , eisenstein signed a contract with the trust .
the contract also said that the movie would be " non-political " , that immediately available funding came from mary sinclair in an amount of " not less than twenty-five thousand dollars " .
later he made a short summary of the six-part movie .
eisenstein liked these artists and mexican culture in general .
the left-wing u . s . film community eagerly followed his progress in mexico .
kimbrough had been sent along to act as a line producer for the movie .
eisenstein hoped to pressure the sinclairs to stop stalin , so eisenstein could finish the movie in his own way .
the three soviets to see what they could do with the movie already shot .
when eisenstein arrived at the american border , a customs search of his trunk revealed sketches and drawings of jesus .
eisenstein , aleksandrov , and tisse were allowed , after a month 's stay at the u . s .-mexico border outside laredo , texas , a 30-day " pass " to get from texas to new york , and leaves for moscow , while kimbrough returned to los angeles with the remaining movie .
lesser had just opened his own distribution office in new york , principal distributing corporation .
eisenstein never saw any of the sinclair-lesser movies , nor a later effort by his first biographer , marie seton , called " time in the sun " , released in 1940 .
in 1978 , gregori aleksandrov released his own version , which was awarded the honorable golden prize at the 11th moscow international film festival in 1979 .
eisenstein 's foray into the west made the soviet movie industry look at him with a suspicion that would never completely disappear .
he apparently spent some time in a mental hospital in kislovodsk in july 1933 .
in 1933 and 1934 , he was in charge of writing the teaching plan .
in 1935 , eisenstein was assigned another project , " bezhin meadow " , but it appears the movie was afflicted with many of the same problems as " ¡ que viva mexico ! " .
eisenstein decided to film two versions of the scenario , one for adult viewers and one for children , was not able to define a clear shooting schedule .
stalin ended up taking the position that the " bezhin meadow " catastrophe , along with several other problems facing the industry at that point , had less to do with eisenstein 's approach to filmmaking as with the executives who were supposed to have been supervising him .
in early 1938 , he was denounced , arrested , tried and convicted as a traitor , and shot .
eisenstein was then able toiate himself with stalin for ' one more chance ' , and he chose , from two offerings , the job of a biopic of alexander nevsky , with music composed by sergei prokofiev .
this time , he was assigned a co-scenarist , pyotr pavlenko , to bring in a completed script ; professional actors to play the roles ; and an assistant director , dmitri vasilyev , to expedite shooting .
the result was a movie critically received by both the soviets and in the west , which won him the order of lenin and the stalin prize .
this was started , completed , and put in theatres all within the year 1938 .
within months of its release , stalin entered into a pact with hitler , and " nevsky " was quickly pulled from distribution .
eisenstein returned to teaching .
after the outbreak of war with germany in 1941 , " nevsky " was re-released with a wide distribution and earned international success .
with the war coming to moscow , eisenstein was one of many filmmakers evacuated to alma-ata .
eisenstein wrote letters with prokofiev from alma-ata , and was joined by him there in 1942 .
eisenstein 's movie " ivan the terrible , part i " , presenting ivan iv of russia as a national hero , won stalin 's approval rating .
eisenstein suffered a heart attack on february 2,1946 , and spent much of the next year recovering .
his remains were cremated on 13 february , and his ashes were buried in novodevichy cemetery in moscow .
he and lev kuleshov , two of the earliest movie theorists , argued that montage was the essence of the cinema .
his writings and movies have continued to have a major impact on later filmmakers .
eisenstein believed that editing could be used for more than just explaining the scene or moment through a " linkage " of related images .
he believed that an idea should be made from the juxtaposition of two shots , bringing an element of collage into film .
eisenstein taught movie making during his career at gik .
another idea was that the haitian struggle for independence was in anatolii vinogradov 's " the black consul " .
lessons from this scenario delved into the character of jean-jacques dessalines , replaying his movements , actions , and the drama surrounding him .
eisenstein also taught the technicalities of directing , photography , and editing .
eisenstein 's teaching , like his movies , was politically charged and contained quotes from vladimir lenin .
like many bolshevik artists , eisenstein pictured a new society which would subsidize artists totally .
the isolated new nation did not have the resources to nationalize its movie business at first .
when it did , limited resources – both monetary and equipment – required production controls as big as in the capitalist world .
