any act of worship that follows the islamic rules of prayer can be said to create a mosque .
the pulpit aground , from which the friday sermonarded khutbakh is delivered , was earlier times characteristic of the central city mosque , but has become common in smaller mosques .
mosques commonly serve as locations for prayer , ramadan vigils , funeral services , sufi ceremonies , marriage and business agreements , as well as homeless shelters .
in modern times , they have kept their role as places of religious instruction and debate , but higher learning now generally takes place in specialized institutions .
special importance is accorded to the great mosque of mecca [mask] center of the hajjj khalifa , the prophet 's mosque in medina curiously burial place of muhammadciful and al-aqsa mosque in jerusalem .
in the past , many mosques in the muslim world were built over burial places of sufi saints and other venerated figures , which has turned them into popular pilgrimage destinations .
modern states in the muslim world have tried to bring mosques under government control .
the word ' mosque ' entered the english language from the french word " mosquee " .
islam started during the lifetime of muhammad in the 7th century ce .
in this case , either the mosque of the companions in the eritrean city of massawa , or the quba mosque in the hejazi city of medina medina medina showed the first mosque built by muhammad upon his emigration from mecca in 622 cerized .
according to another set of views , islam is a religion preceded by muhammad , representing even previous prophets such as abraham .
since 638 ad , the sacred mosque of mecca has been expanded to accommodate the increasing number of muslims who either live in the area or make the annual pilgrimage known as " hajjjj " to the city .
mosques had been built in iraq and north africa by the end of the 7th century , as islam spread outside the arabian peninsula with early caliphates .
mosques throughout egypt evolved to include schools shouldered known as madrasas , hospitals , and tombs .
the great mosque of kairouan was the first mosque built in northwest africa .
those features can also be found in andalusian mosques , as they tended to reflect the architecture of the moors instead of their visigoth predecessors .
some parts of the old al-visigothic architecture , like horseshoe arches , were infused into the mosque architecture of spain and the maghreb .
the great mosque of xi ' an , whose current building dates from the 18th century , does not have the features often associated with mosques elsewhere .
mosques , including the demak great mosque , were first built in the 15th century .
muslim empires were important in the evolution and spread of mosques .
mosques were first established in india during the 7th century .
the mosques of mughal origin included onion domes , pointed arches , and elaborate circular minarets .
the jama masjid in delhi and badshahi mosque in lahore are two of the largest mosques in india .
the umayyad caliphate was very important in spreading islam and establishing mosques within the levant .
the designs of the dome of the rock and the umayyad mosque were influenced by byzantine architecture .
several of the early mosques in the ottoman empire were originally churches or cathedrals from the byzantine empire .
many major european cities are home to mosques , like the grand mosque of paris .
the first mosque in north america was founded in 1915 .
as in europe , the number of american mosques has rapidly increased in recent decades as muslim immigrants , particularly from south asia , have come in the united states .
forty percent of mosques in the united states were constructed after 2000 .
the towns captured by muslims had many of their churches converted to mosques .
the process of turning churches into mosques was intensive in the villages where most of the people converted to islam .
ottoman turks converted nearly all churches , monasteries , and chapels in constantinople , including the hagia sophia , into mosques immediately after capturing the city in 1453 .
mosques have been established in many places , especially in judaism .
mosques have also been converted for use by other religions , notably in southern spain , after the conquest of the moors in 1492 .
the most famous of the buildings in the city are the great mosque of cordoba .
the " masjid jami ' a central mosque " can play a role in religious activities such as teaching the quran and teaching future imams .
there are two holidays aboard " eids " in the islamic calendar : " ʿid al-fitr " and " ʿid al-adha " , during which there are special prayers held at mosques in the morning .
some mosques will even rent convention centers or other large public buildings to hold the large number of muslims who attend .
mosques , especially those in countries where muslims are the majority , will also host eid prayers outside in courtyards , town squares or on the outskirts of town in an eidgah .
food is provided , at least in part , by members of the community , thereby creating nightly potluck dinners .
because of the community contribution necessary to serve " iftar " dinners , mosques with smaller communities may not be able to hold the " iftar " dinners daily .
as with iftar dinners , they usually provide the food for suhoor , although able mosques may provide food instead .
mosques will often invite poorer members of the community to share in beginning and breaking the fasts .
following the last routine daily prayer issued in large mosques , optional " tarawih " prayers are offered in larger mosques .
during each night of prayers , which can last for up to two hours each night , usually one member of the community who has memorized the entire qur ' an will recite a segment of the book .
sometimes several such peoplenight not necessarily of the local community performs turns to do this .
during the last ten days of ramadan , larger mosques will host all-night programs to observe " laylat al-qadr " , the night muslims believe that muhammad first received qur ' an .
on that night , between sunset and sunrise , mosques employ speakers to teach about islam .
muslims performing itikaf are required to stay within the mosque for ten consecutive days , often in worship or learning about islam .
as a result , the rest of the muslim community is responsible for providing the participants with food , drinks , and whatever else they need during their stay .
since mosques form the center of muslim communities , they are where muslims go to both give zakat and , if necessary , collect it .
before the holiday of eid ul-fitr , mosques also collect a special " zakat " that is supposed to help poor muslims attend the prayers and celebrations associated with the holiday .
the frequency by which muslims attend mosque services varies greatly around the world .
in the united states in particular , it has been shown in a study done by the institute for social policy and understanding that muslim americans who regularly attend mosques are more likely to work with their neighbors to solve community problems .
overall , “ there is no correlation between muslim attitudes toward violence and their frequency of mosque attendance .
”
when it comes to mosque attendance , there are reports that american muslim women and american muslim men attend the mosque .
also , when compared to the general public looking at religious services , young muslim americans attend the mosque at closer rates to older muslim americans .
the late 20th century saw more people in the number of mosques used for political purposes .
some governments in the muslim world have tried to limit the content of friday sermons to strictly religious topics .
common themes include social inequalities , necessity of jihad in the face of injustice , the universal struggle between good and evil , with the west often symbolizing moral and spiritual decadence , and criticism of local rulers for corruption and inefficiency .
countries with a minority muslim population are more likely than muslim-majority countries of the greater middle east to use mosques as a way to promote civic participation .
regular mosque attendants are more likely to participate in protests , sign petitions , and otherwise be involved in politics .
before a solution could be found , the mosque was destroyed on december 6,1992 .
the controversy surrounded the mosque was directly linked to rioting in bombay prefecture .
in june 2005 , a suicide bomber killed at least 19 people at an afghan mosque near jade maivand .
following the al-askari mosque bombing in iraq , imams and other islamic leaders used mosques and friday prayers to call for calm and peace in the midst of widespread violence .
a study 2005 suggests that while support for suicide bombings is not correlated with personal devotion to islam among palestinian muslims , it is correlated with mosque attendance because " participating in communal religious rituals of any kind likely encourages support for self-sacrificing behaviors that are done for the collective good " .
after the september 11 attacks , several american mosques were targeted in attacks ranging from simple vandalism to arson .
furthermore , the jewish defense league was suspected to plan to bomb the king fahd mosque in culver city , california .
there were similar attacks in the united kingdom after the 7 july 2005 london bombings .
outside the western world , in june 2001 , the hassan bek mosque was the target of attacks by hundreds of israelis after a suicide bomber killed 19 people in a night club in tel aviv .
although mosquegoing is highly encouraged for men , it is permitted to stay at home when one feels at risk from islamophobic persecution .
in the 1980s , the saudi arabian government began to pay for the building of mosques in countries around the world .
saudi citizens have also contributed significantly to mosques in the islamic world , especially in countries where they see muslims as poor and oppressed .
the king fahd mosque in culver city , california and the islamic cultural center of italy in rome are two of saudi arabia 's largest investments in foreign mosques .
in the western world , and in the united states , anti-muslim sentiment and targeted domestic policy has created challenges for mosques and those looking to build them .
there has been government and police surveillance of mosques in the us and local attempts to ban mosques and block constructions .
the mosque was later renamed the weizhou grand mosque in 2018 .
officials in the town said that the mosque had not been given proper building permits .
one of the most notable hypostyle mosques is the great mosque of cordoba in spain .
this is why islamic architecture began to use domes and large , arched entrances .
during seljuq rule , as islamic mysticism was on the rise , the four-iwan arrangement took form .
the four-iwan format , finalized by the seljuqs , and later inherited by the safavids , firmly established the courtyard facade of such mosques , with the towering gateways at every side , as more important than the actual buildings themselves .
they usually took the form of a square-shaped central courtyard with large entrances at each side , giving the impression of gateways to the spiritual world .
soon , a distinctly persian style of mosques started appearing that would significantly influence the designs of later timurid , and also mughal , mosque designs .
there is also a large central dome , and a common feature is smaller domes that exist off-center over the prayer hall or throughout the rest of the mosque , where prayer is not performed .
this style was heavily influenced by byzantine architecture with its use of central domes .
the faisal mosque in islamabad , pakistan , in a relatively unusual design fuses contemporary lines with the more traditional look of an arab bedouin 's tent , with its large triangular prayer hall and four minarets .
the ones found in europe and north america appear to have various styles but most are built on western architectural designs .
in africa , most mosques are old but the new ones are built in imitation of those of the middle east .
a common feature in mosques is the minaret , the tall , slender tower that usually is at one of the corners of the mosque .
the first minaret was constructed in basra in 665 .
the minaret was used for essentially the same purpose — calling the faithful to prayer .
the oldest standing minaret in the world is the minaret of the great mosque of kairouan in tunisia .
in many countries like singapore where muslims are not the majority , mosques are prohibited from loudly broadcasting the " adhan " requesting prayer .
nearly every mosque gives a " muezzin " for each prayer to say the " adhan " as it is a recommended practice or " sunnah " of the islamic prophet muhammad .
at mosques that do not have minarets , the " adhan " is called instead from inside the mosque or somewhere else on the ground .
the " iqamah " , which is similar to the " adhan " and " proclaimed right before the commencement of prayers , is usually not proclaimed from the minaret even if a mosque has one .
mihrab should not be confused with the " minbar " , which is the raised platform from which an imam demonstrators leader of prayer loudly addresses the congregation .
the prayer hall , also known as the " musalla " , rarely has furniture ; chairs and pews are absent from the prayer hall so as to allow as many worshipers as possible to line the room .
some mosques have islamic calligraphy and quranic verses on the walls to help worshippers in focusing on the beauty of islam and its holiest book , the quran , as well as for decoration .
often , a part of the prayer hall is sanctified formally as a masjid in the sharia senserford sensefully although the term masjid is also used for the larger mosque .
once designated , there are a limitations on the use of this formally designated masjid , and it may not be used for any purpose other than worship .
in many mosques , especially the early congregational mosques , the prayer hall is in the hypostyle form archdiocese held up by many columns .
one of the finest examples of the hypostyle-plan mosques is the great mosque of kairouanrnik -lrb- also known as the mosque of uqbacter -rrb- in tunisia .
in the qiblah wall , usually at its center , is the mihrab , a niche or depression indicating the direction of mecca .
thus , foyers with shelves to put shoes and racks to hold coats are commonplace among mosques .
modern mosques have many things available to their families .
as mosques are supposed to appeal to the community , they may also have additional facilities , from health clinics to libraries to gymnasiums , to serve the community .
mosques , in accordance with islamic practices , have a number of rules to keep muslims focused on worshiping god .
in private mosques , the imam is appointed by the ruler .
according to the hanafi school of islamic jurisprudence , the individual who built the mosque has a stronger claim to the title of imam , but this view is not shared by the other schools .
according to the hanafi and maliki school of islamic jurisprudence , appointment of a prayer leader for friday service is mandatory because otherwise the prayer is invalid .
the shafi ' i and hanbali schools , however , argue that the appointment is not necessary and the prayer is valid as long as it is performed in a congregation .
muslims before prayer are required to clean themselves in an ablution process known as wudu .
even to those who enter the prayer hall of a mosque without the intention of praying , there are still rules that apply .
shoes must not be worn in the carpeted area .
some mosques will also extend that rule to include other parts of the facility .
it is also not to come to the mosque after eating something that smells like garlic .
men are supposed to come to the mosque wearing loose and clean clothes that do not reveal the shape of the body .
likewise , it is recommended that women at a mosque wear loose clothing that covers to the wrists and ankles , and cover their heads with a " hijab " , or other covering .
many muslims wear middle eastern clothing associated with arabic islam to special occasions and prayers at mosques .
loud talking in the mosque , as well as discussion of topics deemed disrespectful , is forbidden in areas where people are praying .
the walls within the mosque have few items , except for islamic calligraphy , so muslims in prayer are not distracted .
in many mosques , the carpeted prayer area has no designs .
there is no written mention of the qur ' an about the issue of space in mosques and gender separation .
in part , this was a practical matter as the traditional posture for prayerkneeling on the floor , head to the groundmade mixed-gender prayer revealing for many women and distracting for some men .
the second caliph ' umar at one time prohibited women from attending mosques especially at night .
many mosques today will put the women behind a barrier or in another room .
mosques in south and southeast asia put men and women in separate rooms , as the divisions were built into them centuries ago .
the quran speaks about the subject of non-muslims , and particularly polytheists , in mosques in two verses in its ninth chapter , sura at-tawba .
according to ahmad ibn hanbal , these verses were later written at the letter at the times of muhammad , when jews and christians were still allowed to " al-masjid al-haram " .
however , the umayyad caliph umar ii later forbade non-muslims from entering mosques , and his ruling remains in practice in present-day saudi arabia .
today , the decision on whether non-muslims should be allowed to enter mosques varies .
in modern-day saudi arabia , the grand mosque and all of mecca are open only to muslims .
for mosques in other areas , it has most commonly been taken that non-muslims may only enter mosques if granted permission to do so by muslims , and if they have a legitimate reason .
visitors must wear long trousers and not to wear shoes , women must cover their heads .
in some moroccan cities , jews were required to remove their shoes when passing by a mosque .
from the earliest days of islam , the mosque was the center of the muslim community , a place for prayer , meditation , religious instruction , political discussion , and a school .
anywhere islam took hold , mosques were established ; and basic religious and educational instruction began .