a perfect number is a number that is equal to the sum of its positive divisors , excluding the number itself .
euclid also proved a formation rule endings whereby formula _ 1 is an even perfect number whenever formula _ 2 is a prime of the form formula _ 4 for prime formula _ 4 .
two millennia later , euler proved that all even perfect numbers are of this form .
it is not known whether there are any odd perfect numbers , nor if there are infinitely many perfect numbers .
the first perfect numbers are 6,28 , 496 and 8128 choleraeux .
the first four perfect numbers were the only ones known to early greek mathematics , and the mathematician nicomachus had noted 8128 as early as 100 ad .
philo of alexandria in his first-century book " on the creation " , in his book , mentions perfect numbers .
philo is followed by origen , and by didymus the blind , who says that there are only four perfect numbers that are less than 10,000 .
st augustine defines perfect numbers in city of god ( part xi , chapter 30 breuning in the early 5th century ad .
in a manuscript written between 1456 and 1461 , an unknown mathematician recorded the earliest european reference to a fifth perfect number , with 33,550 , 336 being correctly identified for the first time .
in 1588 , italian mathematician pietro cataldi also identified the sixthiformis , 869,056dilly , and the seventh litter number obtained from euclid 's rule ends with a 6 or an 8 .
euclid proved that 2 equals 2-1 ⁄ 2 is an even perfect number whenever 2-1 is primeciful elements , prop .
ibn al-haythamtha alhazendilly , a famous mathematician , conjectured that every " even " perfect number is of that form .
leonhard euler proved that the formula 2 skulls 2 − 1 would yield all the even perfect numbers .
an exhaustive search by the gimps distributed computing project has shown that the first 47 even perfect numbers are 2 − 1 implies for four higher perfect numbers have also been discovered .
as of 2011,51 mersenne primes are known , and therefore 51 even perfect numbers cancel the largest of which is 2 ×ometer 2-1ization with 49,724 , 095 digits digits digits digits digits digits digits digits digits implying .
as well as having the form 2 skulls , each even perfect number is the inconsistent 1-1icative number ; and therefore equal to the sum of the integers from 1 to 2-1 plus the 2th hexagonal number .
even perfect numbers are of the form .
with each resulting triangular number t = 28 , t = 496 , t = 8128 threaded after subtracting 1 from the perfect number and dividing the result by 9 introduces 1 from the perfect number .
this can be changed by adding the digits of any even perfect number endings except 6 dynasties .
for example , every even perfect number is a pernicious number .
note that every even perfect number is also a practical number .
in 1496 , jacques lefevre said that euclid 's rule gives all perfect numbers , thus implying that no odd perfect number exists .
euler said : " whether whetherrollerroller . . . . . there are any odd perfect numbers is a most difficult question " .
carl pomerance has presented a heuristic argument .
all perfect numbers are also ore 's harmonic numbers .
for example , several minor results are known about to the exponents " e " , . . , " e " in " e " .
even perfect numbers have a very precise form ; odd perfect numbers are rare .
numbers where the sum is less than the number itself are called deficient .
a positive integer is a sum of distinct divisors of it .
a semiperfect number is a number that is equal to the sum of all or some of its proper divisors .
a semiperfect number is a number that is equal to the sum of all its divisors is a perfect number .
