the atari 5200 supersystem , commonly known as the atari 5200 , is a video game console that was made by atari in 1982 .
the 5200 was created to compete with the intellivision .
the internal hardware is almost identical to that of atari 's 8-bit computers , although software is not directly compatible between the two systems .
the 5200 's controllers have an analog joystick and a numeric keypad along with start , pause , and reset buttons .
the 360-degree non-centering joystick was to say that it was more control than the joystick controller offered with the atari 2600 .
on may 21,1984 , during a press conference at which the atari 7800 was introduced , company executives revealed that the 5200 had been discontinued after just two years on the market .
the 5200 was said to be in excess of 1 million units .
much of the technology in the atari 8-bit family of home computer systems was originally developed as a second-generation games console intended to replace the atari 2600 .
however , as the system was reaching completion , the personal computer revolution started with the release of machines like the commodore pet , trs-80 and apple ii .
these machines had less advanced hardware than the new atari technology , but sold for much higher prices with associated higher profit margins .
atari 's management decided to enter this market , and the technology was changed to the atari 400 and 800 .
the chipset used in these machines was created with the mindset that the 2600 would likely be obsolete by the 1980 time frame .
atari later decided to re-enter the games market with a design that closely matched their original 1978 specifications .
the atari 5200 was originally called the " atari video system x-advanced video computer system " .
some people say that pam actually stood for " personal arcade machine " .
actual working " atari video system x " machines , whose hardware is 100 % identical to the atari 5200 do exist , but are extremely rare .
the first 1982 release of the system featured four controller ports , where nearly all other systems of the day had only one or two ports .
the 5200 also featured a new style of controller with an analog joystick , numeric keypad , two fire buttons on each side of the controller and game function keys for start , pause , and reset .
the 5200 also featured the first automatic tv switchbox , allowing it to automatically switch from regular tv viewing to the game system signal when the system was activated .
previous rf adapters required the user to slide a switch on the adapter by hand .
the rf box was also where the power supply connected in a dual power / television signal setup similar to the rca studio ii 's .
a single cable coming out of the 5200 plugged into the switch box and was used for both electricity and the television signal .
atari changed back to the more conventional separate power supply and manual rf switch .
it also has changes in the cartridge port to allow for the atari 2600 adapter released that year .
while the adapter was only made to work on the two-port version , modifications can be made to the four-port to make it line-compatible .
towards the end of the four-port model 's production run , there were a limited number of consoles produced which included these modifications .
these consoles can be identified by asterisk in their serial number .
the prototypes used in the electrical development lab employed a yoke and gimbal mechanism that came from an airplane controller kit .
the design of the analog joystick , which used a weak rubber boot rather than springs to provide centering , proved to be ungainly and unreliable .
they quickly became the achilles ' heel of the system because of their combination of a very complex mechanical design with a very low-cost internal flex circuit system .
another major flaw of the controllers was that the design did not translate into a linear acceleration from the centre through the arc of the stick travel .
the controllers did , however , include a pause button , a unique feature at the time .
replacement joysticks were also released , including those made by wico .
atari inc . released the pro-line trak-ball controller for the system , which was used primarily for gaming titles such as " centipede " and " missile command " .
a paddle controller and an updated self-centering version of the original controller were also in development , but never made it to market .
the game was shipped with plastic card overlays that snapped in over the keypad .
the card would indicate which game functions , such as changing the view or vehicle speed , were assigned to each key .
the controller was ranked the 10th worst video game controller by ign editor craig harris .
an editor for " next generation " said that their joysticks " made many games nearly unplayable " .
the atari 5200 was described in 1983 by david h . ahl .
its internal design was based on the atari 8-bit family , including antic , pokey , and gtia .
software designed for one does not run on the other , but porting the source code is difficult as long as it does not use computer-specific features .
" antic " magazine reported in 1984 that " the similarities grossly outweigh the differences , so that a 5200 program can be developed and almost entirely debugged on an atari 8-bit computer before testing on a 5200 " .
john j . anderson of creative computing said that the incompatibility was intentional , caused by rivalries between atari 's computer and console divisions .
in 1987 , atari released the xe game system .
anderson wrote that atari could have released a console compatible with computer software in 1981 .
the atari 5200 did not cost much money .
some market analysts have speculated that this hurt its sales , especially since an atari 2600 cartridge adapter had been released for the intellivision ii .
it was later released in 1983 , along with a game adapter that allowed gamers to play all 2600 games .
this lack of new games was due to a lack of money .
many of the 5200 's games appeared simply as updated versions of 2600 titles , which failed to excite consumers .
its pack-in game , " super breakout " , was criticized for not doing enough to demonstrate the system 's capabilities .
ign rated the game a 23 % as the best game consoles of all time .
the 5200 received much criticism for the " sloppy " design of its non-centering analog controllers .
anderson described the controllers as " absolutely atrocious " .
david h . ahl of creative computing video & arcade games said in 1983 that the " atari 5200 is , dare i say it , atari 's answer to intellivision , colecovision , and the astrocade " , describing the console as a " true mass market " version of the atari 8-bit computers despite the incompatibility software incompatibility .
he also wondered why " super breakout " was the pack-in game when it did not use the 5200 's improved graphics .
atari planned a smaller , cost-reduced version of the atari 5200 , which would have removed the controller storage bin .
code-named the " atari 5100 " atari 5200 " atari 5200 jr .
