alligators and caimans are the family crocodylians .
the superfamily alligatoroidea includes all crocodiliansisance fossil and extant ) .
the superfamily first appeared in the upper cretaceous .
" leidyosuchus " of alberta is the earliest known genus .
fossil alligatoroids have been found throughout eurasia .
alligators and caimans split in north america during the late cretaceous .
the chinese alligator was descended from a lineage that crossed the bering land bridge during the neogene .
the modern american alligator is well represented in the fossil record of the pleistocene .
the alligator 's full mitochondrial genome was sequenced in the 1990s .
the full genome , published in 2014 , suggests that the alligator evolved much more slowly than mammals and birds .
the lineage including alligators properilised alligatorinae occurs in the fluvial deposits of the upper chalk in europe , where they did not die out until the pliocene age .
the true alligators are today represented by two species , " a . mississippiensis " in the southeastern united states .
their name derives from the spanish " el lagarto " , which means " the lizard " .
in central and south america , the alligator family is represented by six species of the subfamily caimaninae .
the smooth-fronted caimans in " paleosuchus " and the black caiman in " melanosuchus " are described .
caimans tend to be more agile and crocodile-like in their movements , and have longer , sharper teeth than alligators .
" crocodilus " , the spectacled caiman , has the widest distribution , from southern mexico to the northern half of argentina , and grows to a modest size of about 2.2 m .
the largest is the near threatened " melanosuchus niger " , the " jacare-assu " or large or black caiman of the amazon river basin .
the largest recorded size is 5.79 m .
the black caiman and american alligator are the only members of the alligator family that pose the same danger to humans as the larger species of the crocodile family .
caimans have not been studied in depth , but have learned their mating cycles .
alligators differ from crocodiles in having wider and shorter heads , with more obtuse snouts .
crocodiles tend to be more dangerous to humans than alligators .
caimans and american alligators have a normal diet of fish and meat .
