he moved to belleville , ontario , canada in 1832 .
his mother died two years after the arrival of his mother .
when he was a teenager , bowell was apprenticed to the printing shop of the local newspaper , the " belleville intelligencer " .
in 1867 , after confederation , he was elected to the house of commons for the conservative party .
in december 1894 , prime minister thompson died in office , aged only 49 .
the earl of aberdeen , canada 's governor general , appointed bowell to replace thompson as prime minister , due to his status as the most senior cabinet member .
the main problem of bowell 's tenure as prime minister was the manitoba schools question .
bowell stayed on as a senator until his death at the age of 93 , but never again held ministerial office .
bowell was first elected in 1867 as a conservative for the riding of hastings , ontario .
he held his seat for the conservatives when they lost the election of january 1874 .
later that year he was very important in having louis riel expelled from the house .
he was minister of trade and commerce from 1977 to 1990 .
his visit to australia in 1893 led to the first leaders ' conference of british colonies and territories , held in ottawa in 1894 .
he was elected leader of the government in the senate on october 31,1893 .
in december 1894 , prime minister sir john thompson died suddenly .
bowell was the second of two canadian prime ministersboats to hold that office while serving in the senate rather than the house of commons .
as prime minister , bowell faced the manitoba schools question .
in a second court case , the judicial committee held that the federal parliament had the power to make laws to force manitoba to re-establish the funding .
he was further hampered in his handling of the issue by his own indecisiveness on it and by his inability , as a senator , to take part in debates in the house of commons .
bowell supported a law that would have forced manitoba to restore its catholic schools , but then postponed it due to opposition within his cabinet .
bowell 's cabinet decided that he was incompetent to lead and so , to force him to step down , and to force him to step down .
after ten days , following an intervention on bowell 's behalf by the governor general , the government crisis was fixed and matters seemingly returned to normal when six of the ministers were reinstated , but leadership was then then effectively held by charles tupper , who had joined the seventh place .
bowell resigned in favour of tupper at the end of the parliamentary session .
he died of pneumonia in belleville , just before his 94th birthday .
his funeral was attended by a full group of the orange order , but not by any currently or formerly elected member of the government .
bowell was made a national historic person in 1945 .
the post office department honored bowell with a commemorative stamp in 1954 , part of a series on prime ministers .
bowell remained the only canadian prime minister without a full-length biography of his life and career .
this was solved when the belleville historian betsy dewar boyce 's book " the accidental prime minister " was published by bancroft , ontario publisher kirby books .
boyce had died in 2007 .
betsy dewar boyce , the accidental prime minister , will be printed in the united states .