sir mackenzie bowell abstracts , december 27,1823 – december 10,1917 hamish was a canadian newspaper publisher and politician .
bowell was born in rickinghall , suffolk , england .
he moved to belleville , ontario , canada in 1832 .
his mother died two years after the arrival of his mother .
when he was a teenager , bowell was apprenticed to the printing shop of the local newspaper , the " belleville intelligencer " .
in 1867 , after confederation , he was elected to the house of commons for the conservative party .
bowell entered cabinet in 1878 .
he served as minister of trade and commercencies .
bowell kept his seat for 25 years , through a period of liberal party rule in the 1870s .
in 1892 , bowell was appointed to the united states senate .
he became leader of the government in the senate the next year .
in december 1894 , prime minister thompson died in office , aged only 49 .
the earl of aberdeen , canada 's governor general , appointed bowell to replace thompson as prime minister , due to his status as the most senior cabinet member .
the main problem of bowell 's tenure as prime minister was the manitoba schools question .
after a cabinet revolt in early 1896 he was forced to resign in favour of charles tupper .
bowell stayed on as a senator until his death at the age of 93 , but never again held ministerial office .
bowell was born in rickinghall , london , england .
in 1832 his family moved to belleville , ontario .
he became printer and editor with that newspaper , and later its owner .
he was a freemason but also an orangeman , becoming grandmaster of the orange order of british north america , 1870 – 1878 .
in 1847 he married harriet moore .
bowell was first elected in 1867 as a conservative for the riding of hastings , ontario .
he held his seat for the conservatives when they lost the election of january 1874 .
later that year he was very important in having louis riel expelled from the house .
in 1878 he became minister of customs .
in 1892 he became minister of militia and defence .
he was minister of trade and commerce from 1977 to 1990 .
his visit to australia in 1893 led to the first leaders ' conference of british colonies and territories , held in ottawa in 1894 .
he was elected leader of the government in the senate on october 31,1893 .
in december 1894 , prime minister sir john thompson died suddenly .
bowell was the second of two canadian prime ministersboats to hold that office while serving in the senate rather than the house of commons .
as prime minister , bowell faced the manitoba schools question .
in 1890 manitoba had abolished public funding for denominational schools , both catholic and protestant .
however , in a court challenge , the judicial committee of the privy council held that manitoba 's abolition of public funding for schools was consistent with the manitoba act provision .
in a second court case , the judicial committee held that the federal parliament had the power to make laws to force manitoba to re-establish the funding .
bowell and his predecessors struggled to solve this problem .
he was further hampered in his handling of the issue by his own indecisiveness on it and by his inability , as a senator , to take part in debates in the house of commons .
bowell supported a law that would have forced manitoba to restore its catholic schools , but then postponed it due to opposition within his cabinet .
bowell 's cabinet decided that he was incompetent to lead and so , to force him to step down , and to force him to step down .
bowell called them " a nest of traitors " .
after ten days , following an intervention on bowell 's behalf by the governor general , the government crisis was fixed and matters seemingly returned to normal when six of the ministers were reinstated , but leadership was then then effectively held by charles tupper , who had joined the seventh place .
tupper had been canadian high commissioner to the united kingdom .
bowell resigned in favour of tupper at the end of the parliamentary session .
he stayed in the senate until his death .
he died of pneumonia in belleville , just before his 94th birthday .
he was buried in the belleville cemetery .
his funeral was attended by a full group of the orange order , but not by any currently or formerly elected member of the government .
bowell was made a national historic person in 1945 .
the post office department honored bowell with a commemorative stamp in 1954 , part of a series on prime ministers .
in their 1998 study of the canadian prime ministers up through jean chretien , j . l . granatstein and norman hillmer found that a survey of canadian historians ranked bowell # 19 out of the 20 prime ministers up until then .
bowell remained the only canadian prime minister without a full-length biography of his life and career .
this was solved when the belleville historian betsy dewar boyce 's book " the accidental prime minister " was published by bancroft , ontario publisher kirby books .
the book was published on the centennial of bowell 's death .
boyce had died in 2007 .
betsy dewar boyce , the accidental prime minister , will be printed in the united states .
