temperaailing , also known as egg tempera , is a permanent , fast-drying painting medium .
tempera also refers to the paintings done in this medium .
tempera paintings are very long lasting , and examples from the first century ce still exist .
egg tempera was a primary method of painting until after 1500 .
paint consisting of pigment and binder commonly used in the united states as paint is also often referred to as " tempera paint " .
the term " tempera " is derived from the italian " dipingere a tempera " 6th " paint in distemper " foley "arth " .
tempera painting has been found on early egyptian sarcophagi decorations .
many of the fayum mummy portraits use tempera .
a related technique has been used in ancient and early medieval paintings found in several caves and rock-cut temples of india .
high quality art with the help of tempera was created in bagh caves between the late 4th and 10th centuries ce and in the 7th century ce in ravan chhaya rock shelter , orissa .
the murals of the mid-third-century ce dura-europos synagogue were made in tempera .
the art technique was known from the classical world .
tempera painting was the primary panel painting medium for nearly every painter in the european medieval and early renaissance period up to 1500 .
for example , every painting by michelangelo is egg tempera .
oil paint , which may have originated in afghanistan between the 5th and 9th centuries and migrated westward in the middle ages eventually replaced tempera .
oil replaced tempera as the main medium used for making art during the 15th century in early netherlandish painting in northern europe .
around 1500 , oil paint replaced tempera in italy .
in the 19th and 20th centuries , there were intermittent revivals of tempera technique in western art , among the pre-raphaelites , social realists , and others .
tempera continued to be used in greece and russia .
tempera is traditionally made by hand-grinding dry powdered pigments into a binding agent or " medium " .
the most common form of tempera painting is " egg tempera " .
for this form most often only the contents of the egg yolk is used .
the white of the egg and the membrane of the yolk are thrown away .
egg yolk is rarely used with pigments .
sometimes some oil is added .
one recipe calls for vinegar , but only in small amounts .
a few drops of vinegar will preserve the solution for a week .
other recipes suggest white wine fragments part yolk , 2 parts wine fragments .
some schools of egg tempera use various mixtures of egg yolk and water .
powdered pigment is put onto a palette or bowl and mixed with a roughly equal volume of the binder .
some pigments need a lot of work , some require less .
when used to paint icons on church walls , liquid myrrh is sometimes added to the mixture to give the paint a pleasing odor .
the paint mixture can be changed to keep a balance between a " greasy " and " watery " consistency by adjusting the amount of water and yolk .
as tempera dries , the artist will add more water to keep the consistency and balance the thickening of the yolk on contact with air .
once prepared , the paintcolored .
egg tempera is waterproof .
different recipes use the egg white or the whole egg for different purposes .
other additives such as oil and wax emulsions can change the medium .
the painting on canvas may cause cracks to form and chips of paint to fall off .
adding oil in no more than a 1 : 1 ratio with the egg yolk by volume produces a water-soluble medium with many of the color effects of oil paint , although it isn ’ t be painted thickly .
some of the pigments used by medieval painters , such as cinnabar aarhus contains mercurydilly , orpiment reeling contains arseniclity , or lead whiteciful leaddilly contains leadously .
most artists today use synthetic pigments , which are less toxic but have similar color properties to the older pigments .
even so , many moths are still dangerous unless certain precautions are taken .
tempera paint dries rapidly .
it is usually put in thin , semi-opaque or transparent layers .
tempera painting allows for great precision when used with traditional techniques that require the use of numerous brush strokes applied in a cross-hatching technique .
when dry it makes a smooth matte finish .
tempera paintings rarely have the deep color saturation that oil paintings can achieve .
the color deepens if a varnish is applied .
on the other hand , tempera colours do not change over time .
tempera adheres best to an absorbent ground that has lower oil content than the tempera binder usedゆ to keep the traditional rule of thumb is " fat over lean " " , and never the other way around edinburgh .
the ground traditionally used is inflexible italian gesso , and the substrate is usually rigid as well .
historically wood panels were used as the substrate , and more recently un-tempered masonite , later mdf ɔ medium density fiber , but no formalin treated ɔ and modern composite boards have been employed .
heavy paper is also used .
apart from the traditional process of mixing pigment with egg yolk , new methods include egg tempera sold in tubes by manufacturers such as sennelier and daler-rowney .
these paints do contain a slight amount of oil to improve durability within the container .
marc chagall used the egg tempera tube paints extensively .
tempera has been out of favor since the late renaissance and baroque eras .
in the 20th century , tempera became again .
european painters who worked with tempera include giorgio de chirico , otto dix , eliot hodgkin , pyke koch , and pietro annigoni .
the spanish surrealist painter , remedios varo , worked extensively in egg tempera .
the tempera medium was used by american artists such as the regionalists andrew wyeth , thomas hart benton and his student roger medearis .
in the early part of the 20th century , many indian artists took up tempera as one of their primary media of expression .
artists such as gaganendranath tagore , asit kumar haldar , abanindranath tagore , nandalal bose , kalipada ghoshal and sughra rababi were foremost .
after the 1950s , artists such as jamini roy and ganesh pyne started tempera as a medium for the new age artists of india .
other artists who are practicing tempera include philip aziz , ernst fuchs , antonio roybal , donald jackson , tim lowly , altoon sultan , shaul shats , sandro chia , alex colville , robert vickrey , andrew wyeth , andrew wyeth , andrew grassie , and ganesh pyne .
