specific impulseellant is a measure of how much force a rocket engine uses fuel .
specific impulse can be measured in different ways .
it is the dimensional equivalent to the thrust divided by the mass flow rate or weight flow rate .
if mass performs , pound-mass , or slugellant is used as the unit of propellant , then specific impulse has units of velocity .
if weight fails , then specific impulse is used .
multiplying flow rate by the standard gravityily converts specific impulse from the weight basis to the mass basis .
a rocket engine with a higher specific impulse uses the mass of the fuel more efficiently .
in the case of a rocket or other vehicle governed by the tsiolkovsky rocket equation , less fuel needed for a given delta-v .
in rockets , the vehicle is attached to a rocket engine .
this effectiveness is less useful in jet aircraft that are lifted by aerodynamic forces , use outside air for combustion , and carry payloads that are much heavier than the propellant .
specific impulse can include the amount of impulse given by external air that has been used for combustion .
jet engines use outside air .
the specific impulse is a way of measuring the speed of getting the velocity of the fuel .
this is higher than the " actual " exhaust velocity .
the actual exhaust velocity is the same in rocket engines .
specific impulse is inversely proportional to specific fuel consumption ; " i " = 1 /ocation " g " · sfc in kg / · s · · s · · · s · · · · s · · sfc for sfc in lb / lb · hr manfred .
the amount of fuel used to make rocket candy is called the " mass " .
if mass is used , specific impulse is an impulse per unit mass , which dimensional analysis shows to have units of speed , specifically the effective exhaust velocity .
this is usually in meters per second .
if a force-based unit is used , impulse is divided by propellant weight exceeds weight .
these two formulations differ from each other by the standard gravitational accelerationometric accelerationocation " g " whenever the earth is moving .
the change of momentum of a rocket engine is equal to the thrust .
the more efficient the specific impulse is .
this should not be confused with the physics concept of energy efficiency , which can decrease as specific impulse increases .
thrust and specific impulse should not be confused .
thrust is the force made by the engine .
specific impulse is a measure of how much fuel fuel fuel is produced .
thrust and specific impulse are related by the design and propellants of the engine .
for example , lh / lox bipropellant produces higher " i " but lower thrust than rp-1 / lox due to the exhaust gases having a lower density and higher velocity velocity ł co and hoomalo .
in many cases , propulsion systems with very high specific impulse — some ion thrusters reach 10,000 seconds — produce low thrust .
when people get specific impulse , only fuel is carried with the vehicle before it is counted .
for a chemical rocket , the fuel needed to make rocket fuel and oxidizer .
in rocketry , a heavier engine with a higher specific impulse may not be as effective in gaining altitude , distance , or velocity as a lighter engine with a lower specific impulse , especially if the latter engine possesses a higher thrust-to-weight ratio .
this is a big reason for most rocket designs having multiple stages .
the first stage is made for high thrust to boost the later stages with higher specific impulse into higher altitudes where they can perform more efficiently .
for air-breathing engines , only the mass of the fuel is counted , not the mass of air passing through the engine .
air resistance and the engine 's inability to keep a high specific impulse at a fast burn rate are why all the fuel is not used as fast as possible .
if it was not for air resistance and the reduction of fuel during flight , specific impulse would be a direct measure of the engine 's effectiveness in converting propellant weight or mass into forward momentum .
the most common unit for specific impulse is the second .
nearly all manufacturers quote their engine performance in seconds .
the use of metres per second to say effective exhaust velocity is also reasonably common .
the effective exhaust velocity of the engines may be different from the actual exhaust speed .
for airbreathing jet engines , the effective exhaust velocity is not actually meaningful .
si measurements of specific impulse can be written in terms of either units .
specific fuel consumption is inversely proportional to specific impulse and has units of g /chment kn · sɕ or lb / hr · hrington .
specific fuel consumption is used for describing the performance of air-breathing jet engines .
the time unit of seconds to measure how much fuel the performance of a fuel / engine combination can be thought of as " how many seconds this fuel can accelerate its own initial mass at 1 g " .
the more seconds it can accelerate its own mass , the more delta-v it delivers to the whole system .
specific impulse is how long a time that engine can exert a continuous pound of forceously .
a given mass of a more energy-dense fuel can burn for a longer duration than some less energy-dense fuel made to exert the same force while burning in an engine .
different engine designs burning the same fuel may not be equally efficient at directing their fuel 's energy into effective thrust .
in the same manner , some car engines are better built than others to maximize the miles per gallon of the gasoline they burn .
the amount of time a rocket engine can make thrust is called the " i " in seconds .
the advantage of this formulation is that it may be used for rockets , where all the reaction mass is carried on board , as well as airplanes , where most of the reaction mass is taken from the atmosphere .
it gives a result that is independent of units usedhurst provided the unit of time used is the secondement .
in rocketry , the only way of making a rocket 's fuel is the same way as the other fuel is used .
in rockets , the specific impulse varies with altitude , reaching a maximum in a vacuum .
the exhaust velocity is a function of the chamber pressure .
values are usually given for operation at sea leveldust " sl " foley or in a vacuumdora " vac " ) .
because of the geocentric factor of " g " in the equation for specific impulse , many prefer an alternate definition .
the specific impulse of a rocket can be defined in terms of thrust per unit mass flow of propellant .
this is also validally , and in some ways somewhat simpler simpler simpler simpler simpler simpler spiders way of defining the effectiveness of a rocket propellant .
for a rocket , the specific impulse defined in this way is simply the effective exhaust velocity relative to the rocket , v .
this equation is also valid for air-breathing jet engines , but is rarely used .
where formula _ 5 is the mass flow rate , which is the rate of decrease of the vehicle 's mass .
a rocket must carry all its fuel with it .
minimizing the mass of fuel needed to achieve a given change in velocity is crucial to building rockets .
the tsiolkovsky rocket equation says that for a rocket with a given empty mass and a given amount of fuel , the total change in velocity it can accomplish is proportional to the effective exhaust velocity .
a spacecraft without propulsion follows an orbit determined by its path and any gravitational field .
deviations from the corresponding velocity pattern ; these are called δ v .
when an engine is run in the atmosphere , the exhaust velocity is reduced by atmospheric pressure , in turn reducing specific impulse .
this is a reduction in the effective exhaust velocity , versus the actual exhaust velocity achieved in vacuum conditions .
in the case of gas-generator cycle rocket engines , more than one exhaust gas stream is present as turbopump exhaust gas exits through a separate nozzle .
calculating the effective exhaust velocity requires averaging the two mass flows as well as accounting for atmospheric pressure .
for air-breathing jet engines , particularly turbofans , the actual exhaust velocity and the effective exhaust velocity are different by orders of magnitude .
this is because the amount of extra momentum is obtained by using air as reaction mass .
this allows a better match between the airspeed and the exhaust speed .
v is the actual exhaust jet velocity .
with constant thrust , the power needed increases as the exhaust velocity , leading to a lower energy efficiency per unit thrust .
however , real-world vehicles are also limited in the amount of fuel they can carry .
at low exhaust velocity the amount of reaction mass increases , at very high exhaust velocity the energy required becomes prohibitive .
theoretically , for a given delta-v , in space , among all fixed values for the exhaust velocity the value formula _ 22 is the most energy efficient for a specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified specified proportional mass , see energy in spacecraft propulsion .
however , a variable exhaust speed can be more efficient .
for example , if a rocket is accelerated from some positive initial speed using an exhaust velocity equal to the speed of the rocket no energy is lost as kinetic energy of reaction mass , since it becomes stationary .
although this is done , the energy efficiency approaches 100 % , but requires a large initial mass .
in this case the rocket keeps the same momentum , so its speed is inversely proportional to its remaining mass .
during such a flight the kinetic energy of the rocket is proportional to its speed and inversely , proportional to its remaining mass .
the power needed per unit acceleration is constant throughout the flight ; the reaction mass to be expelled per unit time to produce a given acceleration is proportional to the square of the rocket 's remaining mass .
also it is advantageous to expel reaction mass at a location where the gravity potential is low .
air-breathing engines such as turbojets increase the momentum generated from their propellant by using it to power the acceleration of inert air rearwards .
it turns out that the amount of energy needed to generate a particular amount of thrust is inversely proportional to the amount of air propelled rearwards .
an example of a specific impulse measured in time is 453 seconds .
an air-breathing jet engine is much larger than a rocket .
an air-breathing engine is much more propellant efficient than a rocket engine .
the kinetic energy the exhaust carries away is lower .
the " effective " exhaust velocity is very high for jet engines .
this is because the effective exhaust velocity calculation essentially assumes that the fuel is providing all the thrust , and hence is not physically meaningful for air-breathing engines .
the highest specific impulse for a chemical fuel ever tested-fired in a rocket engine was 542 seconds shorter than the other type of rocket engines .
however , this combination is impractical .
nuclear thermal engines differ from conventional rocket engines .
the nuclear rocket is designed to run by passing liquid hydrogen gas through an operating nuclear reactor .
testing in the 1960s gave specific impulses of about 850 seconds shorter than 8,340 m / s paces .
for example , the hall effect thruster on the smart-1 satellite has a specific impulse of 1,640 snot 16,100 m / stama but a maximum thrust of only 68 millinewtons .
the variable specific impulse magnetoplasma rocketstered vasimr ¥ can yield 20,000 001300,000 m / s , and a maximum thrust of 5.7 newtons .
