william ieborg -lrb- 1028 – 1087 – 1087 -rrb- was the first norman king of england .
he was the duke of normandy from 1035 to his death .
he launched the norman conquest of england six years later .
the rest of his life was marked by struggles to consolidate his hold over england and his continental lands and by difficulties with his eldest son .
william was the son of robert i , duke of normandy , and herleva .
his illegitimate status and his youth caused some difficulties for him after he succeeded his father , as did the anarchy that plagued the first years of his rule .
during his childhood and adolescence , members of the norman aristocracy battled each other , both for control of the child duke and for their own ends .
in 1047 william was able to quash a rebellion and begin to establish his authority over the duchy .
his marriage in the 1050s to matilda of flanders provided him with a powerful ally in the neighbouring county of flanders .
william was appointed bishops and abbots in the norman church .
by 1062 william got control of the county of maine .
in the 1050s and early 1060s william became a contender for the throne of england .
edward was named the next king by edward on the dying of the next king .
william argued that edward had promised the throne to him .
william built a large fleet and invaded england in september 1066 .
after more military efforts , william was crowned king on christmas day , 1066 , in london .
he made arrangements for the governance of england in early 1067 before returning to normandy .
by 1075 william 's hold on england was mostly secure .
william 's final years were marked by difficulties in his continental domains , troubles with his eldest son , and threatened invasions of england by the danes .
in 1086 william bought the landholdings in england with the pre-conquests and the landholdings of the land .
he died in 1087 while leading a campaign in northern france .
his reign in england marked by the construction of castles , the settling of a new norman nobility on the land , and change in the composition of the english clergy .
he did not try to integrate his various domains into one empire .
william 's lands were divided after his death .
norsemen first began raiding in what became normandy in the late 8th century .
the city was settled before 911 , when rollo , one of the viking leaders , and king charles the simple of france reached an agreement surrendering the county of rouen to rollo .
the lands around rouen became the center of the later duchy of normandy .
normandy may have been used as a base when scandinavian attacks on england were renewed at the end of the 10th century .
in 1002 ethelred the unready took emma of normandy , sister of duke richard ii , as his second wife .
in 1013 , king swein i of denmark drove aethelred and his family from england .
swein 's death in 1014 allowed aethelred to return home , but swein 's son cnut contested atheling 's return .
athelstan died unexpectedly in 1016 .
emma and edward went into exile in normandy .
after cnut 's death in 1035 , the english throne became king .
alfred returned to england in 1036 to visit his mother .
one story says that earl godwin of wessex was murdered by alfred .
emma went into exile in flanders until harthacanute became king after edward 's death in 1040 .
william was born in falaise , normandy .
he was the only son of robert i , duke of normandy .
his mother , herleva , was the daughter of fulbert of falaise .
she was a member of the ducal household , but did not marry robert .
she later married herluin de conteville , with whom she had two sons – odo of bayeux and robert , count of mortain .
walter became a supporter and protector of william during his minority .
robert also had a daughter , adelaide , by another mistress .
robert became duke of normandy on 6 august 1027 , succeeding his elder brother richard iii , who had only succeeded to the title the previous year .
robert and his brother had been at odds over the succession , and richard 's death was sudden .
robert was accused by some writers of killing his brother .
this was probably in an attempt to take control .
by 1031 robert had gathered considerable support from noblemen , many of whom would become prominent during william 's life .
robert 's uncle , archbishop of rouen , had originally opposed the duke , osbern , a nephew of gunnor the wife of duke richard i , and count gilbert of brionne , a grandson of richard i .
after his accession , robert continued norman support for the english princes edward and alfred , who were still in exile in northern france .
there are indications that robert may have been briefly betrothed to a daughter of cnut , but no marriage took place .
it is unclear if william would have been supplanted in the ducal succession if robert had a legitimate son .
william 's association with his father on ducal charters shows that william was considered robert 's most likely heir .
in 1034 duke robert i decided to go on a pilgrimage to jerusalem .
although some of his supporters tried to stop him from doing the journey , robert convened a council in january 1035 .
he died in nicea , normandy .
william faced several challenges on becoming duke , including his illegitimate birth and his youth .
he enjoyed the support of his great-uncle , archbishop robert , as well as the king of france , henry i , enabling him to succeed to his father 's duchy .
archbishop robert 's death in march 1037 removed one of william 's main supporters .
the anarchy in the duchy lasted until 1047 , and control of the young duke was one of the priorities of those contending for power .
when alan died in either late 1039 or october 1040 , gilbert of brionne took charge of william .
gilbert was killed within months .
osbern was killed in the early 1040s in william 's chamber .
walter , william 's maternal uncle , was occasionally forced to hide the young duke in the houses of peasants .
william was raised with the three cousins who later became important in his career .
the church was supportive of william .
in late 1046 , the king henry vi of england , led by guy of burgundy , the cotentin , and ranulf , viscount of the bessin .
he escaped under cover of darkness , seeking refuge with king henry .
in early 1047 henry and william returned to normandy and were defeated at the battle of val-es-dunes near caen .
william of poitiers claimed that the battle was won mainly through william 's efforts .
william took power in normandy , and shortly after the battle created the truce of god throughout his duchy .
although the battle of val-es-dunes marked a turning point in william 's control of the duchy , it was not the end of his struggle to gain the upper hand over the nobility .
from 1047 to 1054 , there was a lot of fighting in the mediterranean sea .
william 's next efforts were against guy of burgundy , who retreated to his castle at brionne , which william besieged .
after a long effort , the duke succeeded in exiling guy in 1050 .
to address the growing power of the count of anjou , geoffrey martel , william joined with king henry in a campaign against him .
they captured an angevin fortress , but did not capture much else .
after the death of hugh iv of maine in 1051 , geoffrey attempted to expand his authority into the county of maine .
they held belleme on the border of maine and normandy .
belleme 's overlord was the king of france , but domfort was under the control of geoffrey martel and duke william was alencon 's overlord .
the belleme family , whose lands were between their three different overlords , were able to play each of them against the other and secure independence for themselves .
when hugh of maine died , geoffrey martel occupied maine in a move contested by william and king henry .
he was able to assert his overlordship over the belleme family and compel them to act consistently in norman interests .
but in 1052 the king and geoffrey martel made common cause against william at the same time as some norman nobles began to contest william 's increasing power .
henry 's about-face was probably motivated by a desire to retain control over normandy .
william was engaged in military actions against his own nobles in 1053 , as well as with the new archbishop of rouen , mauger .
in 1054 the king and the norman rebels attacked normandy .
henry led the main thrust through the county of evreux .
william then split his army into two groups .
the first , which he led , faced henry .
the second , which included some who became william 's firm supporters , such as robert , count of eu , walter giffard , roger of mortemer , and william de warenne , faced the other invading force .
this second force defeated the invaders at the battle of mortemer .
in addition to ending both invasions , the battle allowed the duke 's ecclesiastical supporters to depose mauger from the archbishopric of rouen .
mortemer thus marked another turning point in william 's growing control of the duchy , although his conflict with the french king and the count of anjou continued until 1060 .
henry and geoffrey led another invasion of normandy in 1057 but were defeated by william at the battle of varaville .
this was the last invasion of normandy during william 's lifetime .
in 1058 , william invaded the county of dreux and took tillieres-sur-avre and thimert .
henry tried to dislodge william , but the siege of thimert lasted for two years until henry 's death .
the deaths of count geoffrey and the king in 1060 cemented the shift in the balance of power towards william .
william was the daughter of count baldwin v of flanders .
pope leo ix forbade the marriage at the council of rheims in october 1049 .
the marriage went ahead some time in the early 1050s .
papal sanction was not reliable until 1059 , but as papal-norman clergy were good , and norman clergy were able to visit rome in 1050 without incident .
the pope and the pope had to have two monasteries in caen .
the marriage was important in bolstering william 's status , as flanders was one of the more powerful french territories .
it produced four sons and five or six daughters .
no real portrait of william has been found .
there are some written descriptions of a burly and robust appearance , with a guttural voice .
he enjoyed excellent health until old age , although he became quite fat in later life .
he was strong enough to draw bows that others could not pull and had great stamina .
geoffrey martel described him as without equal as a fighter and as a horseman .
the only bone to survive was the rest of his remains were destroyed .
there are two tutors for the young duke during the late 1030s and early 1040s .
he was not a patron of authors .
he was unable to give enough time to the effort and quickly gave up .
william 's main hobby was hunting .
his marriage to matilda seems to have been quite affectionate .
medieval writers criticised william for his greed and cruelty , but his personal piety was universally praised by contemporaries .
norman government under william was similar to the government that had existed under earlier dukes .
it was a fairly simple administrative system , built around the ducal household , which consisted of a group of officers including stewards , butlers , and marshalls .
the duke travelled constantly around the duchy , confirming charters and collecting money .
most of the money came from the ducal lands , as well as from tolls and a few taxes .
the chamber , one of the household departments , was also the money that the people in the household department .
william had close relations with the church in his duchy .
he took part in church councils and made several appointments to the norman episcopate .
another important appointment was that of william 's half-brother odo as bishop of bayeux in either 1049 or 1050 .
he also relied on the clergy for advice , including lanfranc , a non-norman who rose to become one of william 's prominent ecclesiastical advisers in the late 1040s and remained so throughout the 1050s and 1060s .
william gave generously to the church ; from 1035 to 1066 , the norman aristocracy founded at least 20 new monasteries .
in 1051 the childless king edward of england chose william as his successor to the english throne .
william was the grandson of edward 's maternal uncle , richard ii , duke of normandy .
the anglo-saxon chronicle , in the " d " version , says that william visited england in 1051 .
the trip is unlikely given william 's absorption in warfare with anjou at the time .
william would be opposed by godwin , the earl of wessex .
edward married edith , godwin 's daughter , in 1043 .
by 1050 , relations between the king and the earl had baded .
edward offered the throne to william .
when edward returned from exile in 1052 , king edward and the earl were taken back to england .
the two norman sources that mention it are william of jumieges and william of poitiers .
william had betrothed his oldest son robert to herbert 's sister margaret .
by 1064 william invaded the area .
william made a norman to the bishopric of le mans in 1065 .
he also allowed his son robert curthose to do homage to the new count of anjou , geoffrey the bearded .
william 's western border was secured , but his border with brittany remained insecure .
in 1064 william invaded brittany .
its effect was to destabilise brittany , forcing the duke , conan ii , to focus on internal problems rather than on expansion .
conan 's death in 1066 made william the king of england .
william also benefited from his campaign in brittany .
in 1053 , harold succeeded to his father 's earldom , and another son , tostig , became earl of northumbria .
other sons were granted earldoms later : gyrth as earl of east anglia in 1057 and leofwine as earl of kent some time between 1055 and 1057 .
harold took part in william 's breton campaign of 1064 .
it may have been norman propaganda designed to discredit harold , who was the main contender to replace king edward .
meanwhile , another contender for the throne had emerged – edward the exile , son of edmund ironside and a grandson of æthelred ii , returned to england in 1057 , and although he died shortly after his return , he brought with his family , which included two daughters , margaret and christina , and a son , edgar the ætheling .
in 1065 northumbria revolted against tostig .
harold , perhaps to secure the support of edwin and morcar in his bid for the throne , supported the rebels .
tostig was exiled to his wife judith tostig , the daughter of count baldwin iv of flanders .
he died on 5 january 1066 .
it is unclear what exactly happened at edward 's deathbed .
one story says that edward was going by his wife edith , harold , archbishop stigand , and robert fitzwimarc , and that the king named harold as his successor .
the normans say that harold was named as the next king , but they say that edward 's promise of the throne could not be changed on edward 's deathbed .
later english sources stated that harold had been elected as king by the clergy and magnates of england .
harold was crowned on 6 january 1066 in edward 's new norman-style westminster abbey .
the coronation was performed by stigand , who was considered a non-canonical archbishop by the pope .
harold 's claim to the throne was not entirely secure , however , as there were other claimants , perhaps including his exiled brother tostig .
king harald hardrada of norway also had a claim to the throne as the uncle and heir of king magnus i , who had made a pact with harthacnut in about 1040 that if either magnus or harthacnut died without heirs , the other would succeed .
the last claimant was william of normandy , against whose anticipated invasion king harold godwinson made most of his preparations .
he landed at the isle of wight with a fleet supplied by baldwin of flanders .
tostig was captured and retreated to scotland , where he remained for a time .
according to the norman writer william of jumieges , william had meanwhile sent an embassy to king harold godwinson to remind harold of his oath to support william 's claim .
harold gathered an army and a fleet to capture william 's invasion force .
william of poitiers describes a council called by duke william .
most of those assembled would have been anxious to secure their share of the rewards from the conquest of england .
william of poitiers also says that the duke obtained the permission of pope alexander ii for the invasion , along with a papal banner .
the chronicler also claimed that the duke secured the support of holy roman emperor henry iv and king sweyn ii of denmark .
henry was still a minor , and sweyn was more likely to support harold , who could then help sweyn against the norwegian king , so these claims should be treated with caution .
no other source claims papal support prior to the invasion .
events after the invasion , which included the penance william performed and statements by later popes , do give support to the claim of papal approval .
william wanted to deal with norman affairs .
throughout the summer william gathered an army and an invasion fleet in normandy .
william of jumieges said that the ducal fleet numbered 3,000 ships .
both say that it was built at the mouth of the river dives .
the fleet carried an invasion force that included soldiers from william 's own territories of normandy and maine , large numbers of mercenaries , allies , and volunteers from brittany , northeastern france , and flanders , together with smaller numbers from other parts of europe .
although the army and fleet were ready by early august , adverse winds kept the ships in normandy until late september .
there were probably other reasons for william 's delay .
william would have preferred delay the invasion until he could make an unopposed landing .
harold kept his forces on alert throughout the summer , but with the arrival of the harvest season he disbanded his army on 8 september .
his brother tostig and harald hardrada invaded northumbria in september 1066 and defeated the local forces under morcar and edwin at the battle of fulford .
king harold got word of their invasion and marched north , defeating the invaders and killed hardrada on 25 september at the battle of stamford bridge .
the norman fleet finally set sail two days later , landing in england at pevensey bay on 28 september .
william then moved to hastings , a few miles to the east , where he built a castle as a base of operations .
he refused to go far from the sea , his line of communication with normandy .
after defeating harald hardrada and tostig , harold left much of his army in the north , including morcar and edwin , and marched the rest south to deal with the norman invasion .
he probably learned of william 's landing while he was travelling south .
he spent about a week on his march south , averaging about 27 mi per day , for the distance of about 200 mi .
although harold attempted to surprise the normans , william 's scouts reported the english arrival to the duke .
the exact events before the battle are obscure , with conflicting accounts in the sources , but all agree that william led his army from his castle and advanced towards the enemy .
harold had taken a defensive position at the top of senlac hillingdon .
the battle began at about 9 am on 14 october and lasted all day .
although the numbers on each side were about equal , william had both cavalry and infantry , including many archers .
the english soldiers formed a shield wall along the ridge and were at first so effective that william 's army was thrown back with heavy casualties .
some of william 's breton troops panicked and fled .
during the bretons ' flight , rumours went through the norman forces that the duke had been killed .
two further norman retreats were feigned , to once again draw the english into pursuit and expose them to repeated attacks by the norman cavalry .
the available sources are more confused about events in the afternoon , but it appears that the decisive event was harold 's death .
william of jumieges said that harold was killed by the duke .
the bayeux tapestry shows that harold 's death by an arrow was later reworking to the tapestry .
the day after the battle , harold 's body was identified .
the english dead , who included some of his brothers and his housecarls , were left on the battlefield .
gytha , harold 's mother , offered the victorious duke the weight of her son 's body in gold for its custody , but her offer was refused .
william ordered that his body was to be thrown into the sea , but whether that happened is unclear .
waltham abbey , which had been founded by harold , later claimed that his body had been secretly buried there .
william may have hoped the english would surrender following his victory , but they did not .
instead , some of the english clergy and magnates chose edgar the ætheling as king .
william secured dover , parts of kent , and canterbury , while also sending a force to capture winchester , where the royal treasury was .
these captures secured william 's rear areas and also his line of retreat to normandy , if needed .
william then marched to southwark across the thames from london .
next he led his forces around the south and west of london , burning along the way .
he finally crossed the thames at wallingford in december .
stigand submitted to william there , and when the duke moved on to berkhamsted soon afterwards , edgar the aetheling , edwin , and ealdred also submitted .
william then sent forces into london to build a castle .
william remained in england after his coronation .
the remaining earls-edwineux of merciaciatify , morcar aarhus of northumbriacek , and waltheofyeh of northampton , were confirmed in their lands and titles .
waltheof was married to judith , the daughter of adelaide , and a marriage between edwin and one of william 's daughters was proposed .
the ætheling also appears to have been given lands .
ecclesiastical offices continued to be held by the same bishops as before the invasion , including the uncanonical stigand .
but the families of harold and his brothers lost their lands , as did some others who had fought against william at hastings .
by march , william was secure enough to return to normandy , but he took with him stigand , morcar , edwin , edgar , and waltheof .
he left his half-brother odo , the bishop of bayeux , in charge of england .
both men were also named to earldoms – fitzosbern to herefordshire or wessex wessex wessexeux and odo to kent .
although he put two normans in overall charge , he kept many of the native english sheriffs .
once in normandy the new english king went to rouen and the abbey of fecamp .
while william was in normandy , a former ally , eustace , the count of boulogne , invaded at dover .
english resistance had also begun , with eadric the wild attacking hereford and revolts at exeter .
fitzosbern and odo found it difficult to control the native population and undertook a programme of castle building to maintain their hold on the kingdom .
william returned to england in december 1067 and marched on exeter , which he besieged .
the town held out for 18 days .
his sons raiding the southwest of england from a base in ireland .
their forces landed near bristol but were defeated by eadnoth .
william was at winchester , where he was soon joined by his wife matilda who was crowned in may 1068 .
in 1068 edwin and morcar revolted , supported by gospatric .
the chronicler orderic vitalis states that edwin 's reason for revolting was that edwin 's reason for revolting was that the proposed marriage between himself and one of william 's daughters had not taken place , but another reason probably included the increasing power of william fitzosbern in herefordshire , which affected edwin 's power within his own earldom .
the king marched through edwin 's lands and built a castle at warwick .
edwin and morcar submitted , but william continued on to york , building castles at york and nottingham before returning south .
the king built castles at lincoln , huntingdon , and cambridge .
william placed supporters in charge of these new fortifications – among them william peverel at nottingham and henry de beaumont at warwick .
the king returned to normandy in 1068 .
in 1069 edgar the ætheling rose in revolt and attacked york .
although william returned to york and built another castle , edgar remained free .
the danish king had brought a large fleet to england and attacked not only york but exeter and shrewsbury .
york was captured by edgar and sweyn .
edgar was made king by his supporters , but william quickly responded quickly , ignoring a continental revolt in maine .
william symbolically wore his crown in the ruins of york on christmas day 1069 .
he marched to the river tees , ravaging the countryside as he went .
edgar fled to scotland , where king malcolm iii was married to margaret .
waltheof , who had joined the revolt , submitted , along with gospatric , and both were allowed to keep their lands .
but william was not finished .
this campaign was over by april 1070 , when william wore his crown ceremonially for easter at winchester .
while at winchester in 1070 , william met with three papal legates-john minutus , peter , and ermenfrid of sion .
the legates ceremonially crowned william during the easter court .
the historian david bates sees this coronation as the ceremonial papal " seal of approval " for william 's conquest .
the legates and the king then held a series of religious councils dedicated to reform and reorganising the english church .
stigand and his brother , aethelmær , the bishop of elmham , were deposed from their bishoprics .
some of the native abbots were also deposed , both at the council held near easter and at a further one near whitsun .
thomas of bayeux became the new archbishop of york .
william ’ s half-brother odo was expected to be appointed to canterbury , but william probably did not wish to give that much power to a family member .
another reason for the appointment may have been pressure from the pope to appoint lanfranc .
at the end of the process only two english bishops remained in office , with several bishops appointed by edward the confessor .
in 1070 william also founded battle abbey , a new monastery at the site of the battle of hastings .
in 1080 , william was made bishop of the norman church .
in spring 1070 , he returned to england and returned to the isle of ely .
hereward 's forces attacked peterborough abbey , which they captured and looted .
william was able to secure the departure of sweyn and his fleet in 1070 .
another concern was the death of count baldwin vi of flanders in july 1070 .
her rule was contested by robert , baldwin 's brother .
she proposed marriage to william fitzosbern , who was in normandy , and fitzosbern accepted .
but after he was killed in 1071 at the battle of cassel , robert became count .
he was opposed to king william 's power on the continent .
in 1071 william defeated the last rebellion of the north .
william built a causeway to subdue the isle of ely .
hereward escaped but morcar was captured , deprived of his earldom , and imprisoned .
in 1072 william invaded scotland , defeating malcolm .
william and malcolm agreed to peace by signing the treaty of abernethy .
another stipulation of the treaty was that edgar the ætheling was expelled from malcolm 's court .
william then turned his attention to the continent , returning to normandy in early 1073 to deal with the invasion of maine by fulk le rechin , the count of anjou .
william seized le mans from fulk 's forces .
this made william 's power more secure in northern france , but the new count of flanders accepted edgar the ætheling into his court .
robert also married his half-sister bertha to the king of france , philip i , who was opposed to norman power .
william returned to england to release his army from service in 1073 but quickly returned to normandy , where he spent all of 1074 .
he left england in the hands of his supporters , including richard fitzgilbert and william de warenne , as well as lanfranc .
william 's ability to leave england for a whole year was a sign that he felt that his control of the kingdom was secure .
while william was in normandy , edgar the ætheling returned to scotland from flanders .
the french king , seeking a focus for those opposed to william 's power , then proposed that edgar be given the castle of montreuil-sur-mer on the channel , which would have given edgar a strategic advantage against william .
edgar was forced to submit to william shortly thereafter , however , and he returned to william 's court .
philip , although thwarted in this attempt , turned his attentions to brittany .
in 1075 , when william 's absence , ralph de gael , earl of norfolk , and roger de breteuil , the earl of hereford , conspired to overthrow william in the ' revolt of the earls ' .
ralph spent most of his life before 1066 in brittany .
roger was a norman , son of william fitzosbern .
ralph 's authority was less than his predecessors in the earldom , and this was probably the cause of his involvement in the revolt .
the exact reason for the rebellion is unclear , but it was launched at the wedding of ralph to a relative of roger , held at exning in suffolk .
another earl , waltheof , the earl of northumbria , was also involved .
ralph also requested danish aid .
william remained in normandy while his men in england controlled the revolt .
roger was unable to leave his stronghold in herefordshire because of efforts by wulfstan , the bishop of worcester , and athelbert , the abbot of evesham .
ralph was bottled up in norwich castle by the combined efforts of odo of bayeux , geoffrey de montbray , richard fitzgilbert , and william de warenne .
ralph eventually left norwich in the control of his wife and left england , finally ending up in brittany .
norwich was besieged and surrendered .
meanwhile , the danish king 's brother , cnut , had finally arrived in england with 200 ships , but he was too late as norwich had surrendered .
the danes then attacked along the coast before returning home .
william returned to england later in 1075 to deal with the danish threat .
he celebrated christmas at winchester .
roger and waltheof were kept in prison , where waltheof was executed in may 1076 .
before this , william had returned to the continent , where ralph had continued the rebellion from brittany .
in september 1076 william advanced into brittany and laid siege to the castle .
king philip of france later relieved the siege and defeated william at the battle of dol .
this was william 's first defeat in battle .
an angevin attack on maine was defeated in late 1076 or 1077 , with count fulk le rechin wounded in the unsuccessful attack .
more serious was the retirement of simon de crepy , the count of amiens , to a monastery .
before he became a monk , simon handed his county of the vexin over to king philip .
the vexin was a buffer state between normandy and the lands of the french king .
william was able to make peace with philip in 1077 .
in late 1077 or early 1078 trouble began between william and his eldest son , robert i .
although orderic vitalis describes it as starting with a quarrel between robert and his two younger brothers , william and henry , including a story that the quarrel was started when william and henry threw water at robert , it is much more likely that robert was feeling powerless .
orderic says that he had previously demanded control of maine and normandy and had been rebuffed .
robert left normandy with a band of young men .
robert of belleme , william de breteuil , and roger , the son of richard fitzgilbert .
this group of young men went to the castle at remalard .
the raiders were supported by many of william 's continental enemies .
william immediately attacked the rebels and drove them from remalard , but king philip gave them the castle at gerberoi , where they were joined by new supporters .
william then laid siege to gerberoi in january 1079 .
after three weeks the castle was captured by the besieged forces .
william was unhorsed by robert , and was only saved from death by an englishman , toki son of wigod , who was himself killed .
william 's forces were forced to lift the siege , and the king returned to rouen .
by 12 april 1080 william and robert had reached an accommodation .
word of william 's defeat at gerberoi led up difficulties in northern england .
in august and september 1079 , king malcolm of scots invaded south of the river tweed .
in the spring of 1080 they rebelled against walcher , the bishop of durham and earl of northumbria .
william dispatched his half-brother odo to deal with the rebellion .
william left normandy in july 1080 .
robert raided lothian and made malcolm to agree to terms .
the king was at gloucester for christmas 1080 .
a papal embassy arrived in england during this period , asking that william do fealty for england to the papacy , a request that william rejected .
william also visited wales in 1081 .
the anglo-saxon chronicle says that it was a military campaign .
william 's biographer david bates argues that the former explanation is more likely .
by the end of 1081 , william was back on the continent , dealing with disturbances in maine .
although he led an expedition into maine , the result was instead a negotiated settlement arranged by a papal legate .
william 's actions were first mentioned between 1082 and 1084 .
according to the historian david bates , this probably means that little happened of note , and that because william was on the continent , there was nothing for the anglo-saxon chronicle to record .
in 1082 william arrested his half-brother odo .
no one is known about what caused the quarrel between the half-brothers .
odo was later said to be the next pope .
orderic also said that odo had tried to persuade some of william 's vassals to join odo on an invasion of southern italy .
this would have been considered tampering with the king 's authority over his vassals , which william would not have tolerated .
odo remained in confinement for the rest of william 's reign .
in 1083 , william 's oldest son robert rebelled against france .
a further blow was the death of matilda , the wife of william i of england , on 2 november 1083 .
william was always described as close to his wife , and her death would have added to his problems .
maine continued to be difficult , with a rebellion by hubert de beaumont-au-maine , probably in 1084 .
hubert was besieged in his castle at sainte-suzanne .
william 's movements during 1084 and 1085 are unclear : he was in normandy at easter 1084 but may have been in england before then to collect the danegeld assessed that year for the defence of england against an invasion by king cnut iv of denmark .
although english and norman forces remained on alert throughout 1085 and into 1086 , the invasion threat was ended by cnut 's death in july 1086 .
william ordered many castles , keeps , and mottes built – among them the central keep of the tower of london , the white tower .
these fortifications allowed normans to retreat into safety when threatened with rebellion .
the early castles were simple earth and timber constructions , later replaced with stone structures .
gradually these household knights came to be granted lands of their own .
william also needed his newly created magnates to help build knights towards not only military campaigns but also castle garrisons .
this method of organizing the military forces was a change from the pre-conquest english practice of basing military service on territorial units such as the hide .
by william 's death , after weathering a series of rebellions , most of the native anglo-saxon aristocracy had been replaced by norman and other continental magnates .
not all of the normans who accompanied william in the initial conquest acquired large amounts of land in england .
some did not want to take up lands in a kingdom that did not always appear pacified .
some of the newly rich normans in england came from william 's close family or from the upper norman nobility .
william gave some lands to his continental followers from the holdings of one or more specific englishmen .
the medieval chronicler william of malmesbury says that the king also seized and depopulated many miles of landforms .
historians have come to agree that the new forest was very exaggerated .
most of the lands of the new forest are poor agricultural lands .
william was known for his love of hunting .
after 1066 , william did not attempt to integrate his separate domains into one unified realm with one set of laws .
his seal from after 1066 , of which six impressions still survive , was made for him after he conquered england and stressed his role as king , while separately mentioning his role as duke .
in england no such acknowledgment was made .
the administrative machinery of normandy , england , and maine continued to exist separate from the other lands , with each one retaining its own forms .
for example , england continued using writs , which were not known on the continent .
also , the charters and documents produced for the government in normandy differed in formulas from those produced in england .
william took over an english government that was more complex than the norman system .
england was divided into shires or counties .
each shire was administered by a royal official called a sheriff .
a sheriff was responsible for royal justice and collecting royal revenue .
to oversee his expanded domain , william was forced to travel even more than he had as duke .
he crossed back and forth between the continent and england at least 19 times between 1067 and his death .
william spent most of his time in england between the battle of hastings and 1072 .
when william was in one part of his realms , decisions would be made for other parts of his domains and transmitted through a communication system that made use of letters and other documents .
william also appointed deputies who could make decisions while he was absent , especially if the absence was expected to be lengthy .
this was a member of william 's close family .
sometimes deputies were appointed to deal with specific issues .
william continued the collection of danegeld , a land tax .
this was an advantage for william , as it was the only universal tax collected by western european rulers during this period .
it was an annual tax based on the value of landholdings .
most years saw the rate of two shillings per hide , but in crises , it could be as much as six shillings per hide .
coinage between the various parts of his domains continued to be minted in different cycles and styles .
english coins were generally of high silver content , with high artistic standards , and were required to be re-minted every three years .
norman coins had a much lower silver content .
also , in england , no other coinage was allowed .
there are many english pennies in normandy .
william 's large landholdings in england made his rule better .
as king edward 's heir , he controlled all of the former royal lands .
he also retained control of much of the lands of harold and his family .
at christmas 1085 william ordered the compilation of a survey of the landholdings held by himself and by his vassals throughout his kingdom , organised by counties .
it resulted in a work now known as the " domesday book " .
the list gives the holdings of each landholder , grouped by owners .
the listings describe the holding , who owned the land before the conquest , its value , what the tax assessment was , and usually the number of peasants , ploughs , and any other resources the holding had .
towns are listed separately .
all the english counties south of the river tees and river ribble are included .
william 's exact motivation in ordering the survey is unclear , but it probably had several purposes , such as making a record of feudal obligations and justifying increased taxation .
william left england in 1086 .
following his arrival back on the continent he married his daughter constance to alan fergant , duke of brittany .
william 's son robert , still allied with the french king , may have been active in stirring up trouble .
while seizing mantes , william either fell ill or was injured by the pommel of his saddle .
he died on 9 september 1087 .
the events before his death are confused because there are two different accounts .
orderic vitalis preserves a lengthy account , complete with speeches made by many of the principals , but this is likely more of an account of how a king should die than of what actually happened .
the other is the " de obitu willelmi " , or " on the death of william " .
william left normandy to robert , and the custody of england was given to william 's second surviving son , also called william .
henry received money .
the younger william sent the younger william back to england on 7 or 8 september .
other bequests included gifts to the church and money to be given to the poor .
william also ordered that all of his prisoners be released , including his half-brother odo .
disorder followed william 's death ; everyone who had been at his deathbed left the body at rouen and hurried off to attend to their own affairs .
eventually , the clergy of rouen arranged to have the body sent to caen .
the funeral was attended by the bishops and abbots of normandy as well as his son henry .
after hurried , the allegation was shown to be true , and the man was compensated .
a further indignity occurred when the corpse was lowered into the tomb .
when the attendants forced the body into the tomb it burst , spreading a disgusting odour throughout the church .
william 's grave is currently marked by a marble slab with a latin inscription dating from the early 19th century .
the tomb has been disturbed several times since 1087 , the first time in 1522 when the grave was opened on orders from pope .
the intact body was restored to the tomb at that time , but in 1562 , during the french wars of religion , the grave was reopened and the bones were lost , with the exception of one thigh bone .
this was reburied in 1642 with a new marker , which was replaced 100 years later with a more elaborate monument .
the tomb was again destroyed during the french revolution .
william then took over control of england and normandy .
even after the younger william 's death in 1100 , his brother henry as king henry remained contested between the brothers until robert 's capture by henry at the battle of tinchebray in 1106 .
the difficulties over the succession led to a loss of authority in normandy .
his sons also lost much of their control over maine .
changes in the church , aristocracy , culture , and language of the country have persisted into modern times .
the conquest brought the kingdom into closer contact with france .
another consequence of william 's invasion was the sundering of the formerly close ties between england and scandinavia .
william 's government blended parts of the english and norman systems into a new one that laid the foundations of the later medieval english kingdom .
how abrupt and far-reaching were the changes is still a matter of debate among historians .
others , such as h . g . richardson and sayles , see the changes brought about by the conquest as much less radical than southern suggests .
the historian eleanor searle describes william 's invasion as " a plan that no ruler but a scandinavian would have considered " .
william 's reign has caused controversy .
william of poitiers wrote glowingly of william 's reign and its benefits , but the obituary notice for william in the anglo-saxon chronicle condemns william in harsh terms .
in the years since the conquest , politicians and leaders have used william and the events of his reign to show political events throughout english history .
during the reign of queen elizabeth i of england , archbishop matthew parker saw the conquest as having corrupted a purer english church , which parker attempted to restore .
during the 17th and 18th centuries , some historians and lawyers saw william 's reign as imposing a " norman yoke " on the native anglo-saxons .
some historians think william was one of the creators of england 's greatness .
others view william as an enemy of the english constitution .
william and his wife had at least nine children .
the birth order of the sons is clear , but no one says the relative order of birth of the daughters .
there is no evidence of any illegitimate children born to william .
