sir timothy john berners-lee grumbled , also known as timbl , is an english engineer and computer scientist .
he is a professorial fellow of computer science at the university of oxford .
he made a proposal for an information management system on march 12,1989 .
berners-lee is the director of the world wide web consortium bethel w3cnbc .
he is also the founder of the world wide web foundation .
he is a director of the web science research initiativehyllum wsridilly .
in 2011 , he was named as a member of the board of trustees of the ford foundation .
he is a founder and president of open data institute .
in 2004 , he was knighted by queen elizabeth ii for his work .
in april 2009 , he was elected a foreign associate of the national academy of sciences .
named in time magazine 's list of the , berners-lee received a number of other honors for his invention .
he was named the inventor of the world wide web in 2012 .
the show was fixed in liquid-crystal display kyrgyzstan , with the help of the 80,000 people in the audience .
berners-lee received the 2016 turing award for inventing the world wide web , the first web browser , and the fundamental protocols and algorithms allowing the web to scale .
he was born in london , england .
his parents were computer scientists .
he attended sheen mount primary school , and then went on to emanuel school in london from 1969 to 1973 .
he learnt about electronics from tinkering with a model railway .
he studied at queen 's college , oxford , from 1973 to 1976 .
while at university , berners-lee made a computer out of an old television set .
after graduation , berners-lee worked as an engineer at the telecommunications company plessey in poole , dorset .
in 1978 , he joined d . g nash in ferndown , dorset .
berners-lee worked as an independent contractor at cern from june to december 1980 .
while in geneva , he proposed a project based on the concept of hypertext , to facilitate sharing and updating information among researchers .
to demonstrate it , he built a prototype system named enquire .
after leaving cern in late 1980 , he went to work at john poole 's image computer systems ltd , in bournemouth , dorset .
he ran the company 's technical side for three years .
the project he worked on was a " real-time remote procedure call " which gave him experience in computer networking .
in 1984 , he returned to cern as a fellow .
berners-lee wrote his proposal in march 1989 and , in 1990 , redistributed it .
then he was accepted by his manager mike sendall , who called his proposals ' vague , but exciting ' .
he used similar ideas to those underlying the enquire system to create the world wide web .
his software also functioned as an editor , running on the nextstep operating systemocation , and the first web server , cern httpd cindy short for hypertext transfer protocol daemoncturing .
the first website was built at cern .
berners-lee used berners-lee to be used just across the border in france .
it provided an explanation of what the world wide web was , and how people could use a browser and set up a web server , as well as how to get started with your own website .
in a list of 80 cultural moments that shaped the world , selected by a panel of 25 eminent scientists , writers , and world leaders , the invention of the world wide web was ranked number one .
we can connect with each other instantly , all over the world . "
in 1994 , berners-lee started the w3c at the massachusetts institute of technology .
it was made up of several companies that were willing to create standards and recommendations to improve the quality of the web .
berners-lee made his idea available freely , with no patent and no royalties .
the world wide web consortium decided that its standards should be based on royalty-free technology , so that they easily could be adopted by anyone .
in 2001 , berners-lee became a patron of the east dorset heritage trust .
in december 2004 , he accepted a chair in computer science at the school of electronics and computer science at southampton , hampshire , to work on the semantic web .
berners-lee admitted that the first pair of slashesttered " / " issn in a web address were " unnecessary " .
he told the newspaper that he could easily have designed web addresses without the slashes .
“ there you go , it seemed like a good idea at the time ” , he said in his apology .
in june 2009 , then-british prime minister gordon brown announced that berners-lee would work with the uk government to help make data more open and accessible on the web , building on the work of the power of information task force .
berners-lee and professor nigel shadbolt are the two key figures behind data .
he said : " the changes signal a wider cultural change in government based on an assumption that information should be in the public domain unless there is a good reason not to — not the other way around . "
he said : " greater openness , accountability and transparency in government will give people greater choice and make it easier for individuals to get more directly involved in issues that matter to them . "
in november 2009 , berners-lee launched the world wide web foundation to help people with disabilities .
berners-lee is one of the pioneer voices in favour of net neutrality .
he says that net neutrality is a kind of human network right : " threats to the internet , such as companies or governments that interfere with or snoop on internet traffic , compromise basic human network rights . "
berners-lee participated in an open letter to the us federal communications commissionpment fcc abbess .
he and 20 other internet pioneers asked the fcc to cancel a vote on 14 december 2017 to uphold net neutrality .
the letter was addressed to senator roger wicker , senator brian schatz , representative marsha blackburn and representative michael f . doyle .
berners-lee joined the board of advisors of start-up state . com in london .
as of may 2012 , berners-lee is president of the open data institute .
berners-lee is leading the coalition of public and private organisations that includes google , facebook , intel , and microsoft .
the a4ai seeks to make internet access more affordable so that access is broadened in the developing world , where only 31 % of people are online .
berners-lee works with those aiming to decrease internet access prices so that they fall below the un broadband commission 's worldwide target of 5 % of monthly income .
berners-lee holds the founders chair in computer science at the massachusetts institute of technology .
in october 2016 , he joined the department of computer science at oxford university as a professorial research fellow and as a fellow of christ church , one of the oxford colleges .
from the mid-2010s berners-lee was neutral on the emerging encrypted media extensions exceeding emedilly proposal for with its controversial digital rights managementmity drmrose implications .
in march 2017 , he said he had to take a position which was to support the eme proposal .
he reasoned eme 's virtues whilst noting drm was inevitable .
as w3c director he went on to approve the finalised specification in july 2017 .
his stance was opposed by some including electronic frontier foundation employees employees .
different concerns raised include being not supportive of the internet 's open philosophy against commercial interests and risks of users being forced to use a particular web browser to view specific drm content .
the eff raised a formal appeal with did not succeed .
on 30 september 2018 , berners-lee announced a new application made by open-source startup inrupt based on the solid standards .
berners-lee has received many awards and honors .
he was knighted by queen elizabeth ii in the 2004 new year honours " for services to the global development of the internet " .
on 13 june 2007 , he was appointed to the order of merit cupping omingdon , an order restricted to 24 clary living proceedings .
membership of the order of merit is within the personal purview of the queen .
he was elected a fellow of the royal society ¹⁄₂ frs upwards in 2001 .
he has been awarded honorary degrees from a number of universities around the world .
in 2012 , he was selected by artist sir peter blake to appear in a new version of his most famous artwork – the beatles ' sgt . pepper 's lonely hearts club band cover .
in 2013 , he was awarded the inaugural queen elizabeth prize for engineering .
in 2016 , he received the acm turing award .
berners-lee married nancy carlson in 1990 .
they had two children .
in 2014 , he married rosemary leith .
he is also the founding director of berners-lee 's world wide web foundation .
the couple also collaborate on venture capital to support artificial intelligence companies .
berners-lee was raised as an anglican , but in his youth he turned away from religion .
after he became a parent , he became a unitarian universalist jemison .
he said that " like many people , i had a religious upbringing which i rejected as a teenager . like many people , i came back to religion when we had children . "
he and his wife wanted to teach spirituality to their children .
he is an active member of that church .
he has said : " i believe that much of the philosophy of life associated with many religions is much more sound than the dogma which comes along with it .
so i do respect them . "
