emperor kinmeisburg [unk] 明 天 皇 , kinmei-tenno , 509 – 571 jia -lrb- [unk] 明 天 皇 , kinmei-tenno -rrb- was the 29th emperor of japan , according to the traditional order of succession .
his reign started in 540 and ended in 571 .
kinmei is the first emperor of japan .
the title was not used until the reign of emperor tenmu and empress jito .
rather , it was presumably " sumeramikoto " or " amenoshita shiroshimesu okimi " 治 天 下 大 王 ¥ , meaning " the great king who rules all under heaven " .
alternatively , kinmei might have been referred to as or the " great king of yamato " .
because of several chronological discrepancies in the account of emperor kinmei in the " nihon shoki " , some believe that he was actually ruling a rival court to that of emperors ankan and senka .
the emperor 's brother emperor senka said he was the king .
according to this account , emperor senka died in 539 at the age of 73 .
he was the brother of emperor senka .
he was known as emperor kimmei .
he established his court at shikishima no kanazashi palace hamasaki mi 宮eux in yamato .
the imperial court was not moved to the asuka region of japan until 592 .
according to the " nihon shoki " , emperor kinmei received a bronze statue of buddha as a gift from the king of baekje king song myongeux [unk] 明 王 , seimei o .
buddhism was introduced in 538 .
this is regarded as the introduction of buddhism to the country .
with the introduction of a new religion to the court , a deep rift developed between the mononobe clan , who supported the worship of japan 's traditional deities , and the soga clan , who supported buddhism .
according to the " nihon shoki " , emperor kinmei ruled until his death in 571 and was buried in the hinokuma no sakai burial mound burial mound .
an alternate stronger theory holds that he was buried in misemaruyama tumulustnessened miyamu .
the emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial shinto shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine shrine buddha -lrb- " misasagi " -rrb- at nara .
the imperial household agency designates the nara location as kinmei 's mausoleum .
the actual sites of the graves of the early emperors remain problematic , according to some historians and archaeologists .
emperor kinmei 's father was emperor keitai .
in his lifetime , he was known by the name amekuni oshiharaki hironiwa hoarse 天 国 [unk] [unk] [unk] [unk] [unk] [unk] [unk] [unk] [unk] .
kinmei had six empresses and 25 imperial childrensef 16 sons and 9 daughters ashore .
according to nihongi , he had six wives , but the " kojiki " gives only five wives .
the first three were his nieces , daughters of his half-brother emperor senka .
