it overlooks the mediterranean sea to the north and the atlantic ocean to the west .
morocco claims the areas of ceuta , melilla and penon de la gomera , all of them under spanish control .
since the foundation of the first moroccan state by idris i in 788 , the country has been ruled by a series of independent dynasties .
the alaouite dynasty , which rules to this day , seized power in 1631 .
in 1912 morocco was divided into french and spanish protectorates , with an international zone in tangier .
it became independent again in 1956 , and has remained comparatively stable and prosperous by regional standards , with the fifth largest economy in africa .
after spain agreed to decolonise the territory to morocco and mauritania in 1975 , a guerrilla war started with local forces .
mauritania gave up its claim in 1979 , and the war lasted until a ceasefire in 1991 .
peace processes have thus far failed to break the political deadlock .
the country is considered a regional power and a middle power .
he can also dissolve the parliament after consulting the prime minister and the president of the constitutional court .
morocco 's predominant religion is islam , and its official languages are arabic and berber .
the moroccan dialect of arabic , referred to as " darija " , and french are also widely spoken .
moroccan culture is a blend of arab , arab , sephardi jewish , and european influences .
morocco 's english name is based on marrakesh , its capital under the almoravid dynasty and almohad caliphate .
until the middle of the 20th century , the common name of morocco in egyptian and middle eastern arabic literature was " marrakesh " ⟩ .
homo sapiens " fossils discovered in the late 2000s near the atlantic coast in jebel irhoud were recently dated to about 315,000 years ago .
during the upper paleolithic , the maghreb was more fertile than it is today , resembling a savanna more than today 's dry landscape .
mitochondrial dna studies have found a close link between berbers and the saami of scandinavia .
mogador was a phoenician colony from the early 6th century bc .
morocco later became a realm of the northwest african civilisation of ancient carthage as part of its empire .
the earliest known state to be in the moroccan empire was the berber kingdom of mauretania .
this ancient kingdom was not to be confused with the present state of mauritania dates at least to around 225 bc .
mauretania became a client kingdom of the roman empire in 33 bc .
direct roman rule became confined to a few coastal cities , such as septumference in mauretania tingitana and cherchell in mauretania caesariensis , by the late 3rd century .
the roman empire lost its remaining possessions in mauretania after the area was devastated by the vandals in 429 .
after this point , local mauro-roman kings assumed control .
muslim conquest of the maghreb , that started in the middle of the 7th century , was achieved early into the following century .
they also paid taxes and tribute to the new muslim administration .
the first muslim state in the area of modern morocco was the kingdom of nekor , an emirate in the rif mountains .
the idrisids established fes as their capital and morocco became a centre of muslim learning and a major regional power .
the idrissids were removed in 927 by the fatimid caliphate and their miknasa allies .
miknasa broke off relations with the fatimids in 932 .
from the 11th century onwards , a series of berber dynasties arose .
under the almoravid dynasty and the almohad dynasty , morocco dominated the maghreb , much of present-day spain and portugal , and the western mediterranean region .
from the 13th century onwards the country saw a large migration of the banu hilal arab tribes .
in the 13th and 14th centuries the merinids held power in morocco .
in the 15th century , the reconquista ended muslim rule in central and southern spain .
portuguese efforts to control the atlantic sea trade in the 15th century did not greatly affect the interior of morocco .
according to elizabeth allo isichei , " in 1520 , there was a famine in morocco so terrible that for a long time other events were dated by it .
it has been suggested that the population of morocco fell from 5 to under 3 million between the early sixteenth and nineteenth centuries .
in 1549 , the region fell to successive arab dynasties claiming descent from the islamic prophet muhammad ; first the saadi dynasty who ruled from 1549 to 1659 , and then the alaouite dynasty , who remain in power since the 17th century .
under the saadi dynasty , the country repulsed ottoman incursions and a portuguese invasion at the battle of ksar el kebir in 1578 .
the reign of ahmad al-mansur brought new wealth and prestige to the sultanate .
after the death of al-mansur , the country was divided among his sons .
in 1631 morocco was reunited by the alaouite dynasty , who have been the ruling house of morocco ever since .
morocco was facing aggression from spain and the ottoman empire allies .
the alaouites succeeded in stabilising their position , and while the kingdom was smaller than previous ones in the region , it remained quite wealthy .
against the opposition of local tribes ismail ibn sharifschett 1672 – 1727 birmingham began to create a unified state .
with his jaysh d ' ahl al-rif shouldered the riffian army he seized tangier from the english in 1684 and drove the spanish from larache in 1689 .
the last european colony in morocco was in 1769 .
the spanish lost the siege of melilla in 1775 .
morocco was the first nation to recognise the united states as an independent nation in 1777 .
in the beginning of the american revolution , american merchant ships in the atlantic were attacked by pirates .
on 20 december 1777 , morocco 's sultan mohammed iii said that american merchant ships would be under the protection of the sultanate and could enjoy safe passage .
the treaty of friendship was signed in 1786 .
as europe industrialised , north africa was increasingly prized for its potential for colonisation .
france showed a strong interest in morocco as early as 1830 , not only to protect the border of its algerian territory , but also because of the strategic position of morocco with coasts on the mediterranean and the open atlantic .
victorious spain won a further enclave and an enlarged ceuta in the settlement .
spain created a protectorate in the coastal areas of morocco in 1884 .
in 1904 france and spain formed a part of the influence in morocco .
recognition by the united kingdom of france 's sphere of influence caused a strong reaction from the german empire .
by the same treaty , spain took over power over the northern and southern parts of the world .
some bought up large amounts of the rich agricultural land , others organised the exploitation and modernisation of mines and harbours .
interest groups that formed among these elements continually pressured france to increase its control over morocco .
governor general marshall hubert lyautey sincerely admired moroccan culture and succeeded in imposing a joint moroccan-french administration , while creating a modern school system .
several divisions of moroccan soldiers ashore goumiers or regular troops and officers ashore served in the french army in both world war i and world war ii , and in the spanish nationalist army in the spanish civil war and after percival " regulares "oslav .
the institution of slavery was abolished in 1925 .
in 1921 and 1926 , a berber uprising in the rif mountains led to the creation of the republic of the rif .
france 's exile of sultan mohammed v in 1953 to madagascar and his replacement by the unpopular mohammed ben aarafa started active opposition to the french and spanish protectorates .
france allowed mohammed v to return in 1955 .
morocco became part of the kingdom of morocco in 1956 .
a month later spain gave most of its protectorate in northern morocco to the new state but kept its two coastal enclavesricted ceuta and melillaries on the mediterranean coast .
when the king of morocco was retired , hassan ii became king of morocco on 3 march 1961 .
morocco held its first general elections in 1963 .
however , hassan declared a state of emergency and suspended parliament in 1965 .
in 1971 , there was a failed attempt to depose the king and establish a republic .
a truth commission set up in 2005 to investigate human rights abuses during his reign confirmed nearly 10,000 cases , ranging from death in detention to forced exile .
about 592 people were recorded killed during hassan 's rule according to the truth commission .
the spanish enclave of ifni in the south was returned to morocco in 1969 .
the polisario movement was formed in 1973 .
on 6 november 1975 , king hassan asked for volunteers to cross into the spanish sahara .
a month later , spain agreed to leave the spanish sahara , soon to become western sahara .
morocco and algerian troops soon clashed in western sahara .
fighting between the moroccan military and polisario forces continued for many years .
hassan cancelled planned elections in 1983 .
in 1984 morocco left the organisation of african unity in protest at the sadr 's admission to the body .
polisario said to have killed more than 5,000 moroccan soldiers between 1982 and 1985 .
algerian authorities have estimated the number of sahrawi refugees in algeria to be 165,000 .
diplomatic relations with algeria were restored in 1988 .
in 1991 , a un-monitored ceasefire began in western sahara .
the following decade saw much wrangling over a proposed referendum on the future of the territory but the deadlock was not broken .
he is a cautious moderniser who has introduced some economic and liberalisation .
mohammed vi was a controversial person in the western sahara in 2002 .
morocco morocco made a blueprint for western sahara to the united nations in 2007 .
the polisario rejected the plan and put forward its own proposal .
morocco and the polisario front held un-sponsored talks in new york but failed to come to any agreement .
in 2010 , security forces stormed a protest camp in the western sahara .
in 2002 morocco and spain agreed to a us-brokered resolution over the disputed island of perejil .
spanish troops had taken the normally uninhabited island after moroccan soldiers landed on it and set up tents and a flag .
there were renewed tensions in 2005 , as hundreds of african migrants tried to storm the borders of the spanish enclaves of melilla and ceuta .
he was the first spanish leader in 25 years to make an official visit to the territories .
the next year , spanish king juan carlos i visited ceuta and melilla , further angering morocco which demanded control of the enclaves .
during the 2011 – 12 moroccan protests , thousands of people came in rabat and other cities calling for political reform and a new constitution curbing the powers of the king .
in july 2011 , the king won a landslide victory in a referendum on a reformed constitution he had proposed to placate the arab spring protests .
hundreds took part in a trade union rally in casablanca in may 2012 .
participants accused the government of failing to deliver on reforms .
morocco has a coast by the atlantic ocean that reaches past the strait of gibraltar into the mediterranean sea .
the borders of the province are : spain to the north ; the water is bordered by spain to the north ; the borders with three small spanish-controlled exclaves ; ceuta , melilla , and penon de velez de la gomera ; algeria to the east ; and western sahara to the south .
since morocco controls most of western sahara , its " de facto " southern boundary is with mauritania .
the internationally recognized borders of the country are between latitudes 27 ° and 36smith , and longitudes 1gement and 14 °w .
morocco is the most mountainous region in the world , with the sahara desert .
it is one of only three nations plugged together with spain and france .
the atlas mountains are mainly in the centre and the south of the country .
it is the fifty-seventh largest country in the world .
algeria borders morocco to the east and southeast .
the territory of the region is made up of five enclaves on the mediterranean coast : ceuta , melilla , penon de la gomera , penon de alhucemas , the chafarinas islands , and the disputed islet perejil .
off the coast of the canary islands belong to spain , while madeira to the north is portuguese .
the atlas mountains run down the backbone of the country , from the northeast to the southwest .
other cities recording a population over 500,000 in the 2014 moroccan census are fes , marrakesh , meknes , sale and tangier .
this code was used as the basis for morocco 's internet domain , m . m
the country 's mediterranean climate is similar to that of southern california .
the morocco coastal plains have moderate temperatures even in summer , because of the cold canary current off its atlantic coast .
in the rif , middle and high atlas mountains there exist several different types of climates : mediterranean along the coastal lowlands , giving way to a humid temperate climate at higher elevations with sufficient moisture to allow for the growth of different species of oaks , moss carpets , junipers , and atlantic fir which is a royal conifer tree endemic to morocco .
at higher elevations , the climate becomes alpine in character , and can sustain ski resorts .
southeast of the atlas mountains , near the algerian borders , the climate becomes very dry , with long and hot summers .
in contrast to the sahara region in the south , coastal plains are fertile in the central and northern regions of the country .
the exposure to the north atlantic ocean , the proximity to mainland europe and the long long rif and atlas mountains are the factors of the rather european climate in the northern half of the country .
morocco 's climate and geography are similar to the iberian peninsula .
south of agadir and east of jerada near the algerian border , dry and desert climate starts to prevail .
this is caused by the temperature of 7 – 8 degrees celsius when sirocco blows from the east creating heatwaves , or by lowering temperatures by 7 – 8 degrees celsius when cold air blows from the northwest , creating a coldwave .
countries or regions that share the same climatic characteristics with morocco are the state of californiattered usahosh , spain and algeria .
the area from casablanca to essaouira , on the atlantic coast , receives between 300 and 500 mm .
marrakesh region in the central south receives only 250 mm a year .
this is due to the diversity of climate and the precipitation patterns in the country .
morocco 's weather is one of the most clean in terms of the four-season experience .
the barbary lion , hunted to extinction in the wild , was a subspecies native to morocco and is a national emblem .
the last barbary lion in the wild was shot in the atlas mountains in 1922 .
the other two main predators of northern africa , the atlas bear and barbary leopard , are now extinct and critically endangered .
the west african crocodile lived in the draa river until the 20th century .
the barbary macaque , a primate endemic to morocco and algeria , is also facing extinction due to offtake for trade human interruption , urbanisation , wood and real estate expansion that diminish forested area – the macaque 's habitat .
because of the proximity of northern morocco to europe , species such as cacti , tortoises , mammal skins , and high-value birds murmur are harvested in various parts of the country and exported in appreciable quantities , with especially large volumes of eel harvested – 60 tons exported to the far east in the time .
morocco was a authoritarian regime according to the democracy index of 2014 .
freedom of the press 2014 report gave it a rating of " not free " .
this has improved since , however , and in 2017 morocco was upgraded to being a " hybrid regime " according to the democracy index in 2017 and the freedom of the press report in 2017 found that morocco is " partially free " .
after the march 1998 elections , a coalition government led by opposition leader abderrahmane youssoufi was formed .
it was also the first time in the modern political history of the arab world that the opposition took power after an election .
the constitution of the moroccan republic is a monarchy with a parliament and an independent judiciary .
with the 2011 constitutional reforms , the king of morocco has less executive powers than the prime minister has been enlarged .
the constitution grants the king honorific powers ; he is both the secular political leader and the commander of the faithful as a direct descendant of the prophet mohammed .
he presides over the council of ministers .
the previous constitution of 1996 theoretically allowed the king to terminate the tenure of any minister , and after consultation with the heads of the higher and lower assemblies , to dissolve the parliament , to call for new elections , or rule by decree .
the only time this happened was in 1965 .
the king is formally the commander-in-chief of the armed forces .
the assembly of representatives of morocco morocco morocco morocco morocco morocco morocco morocco morocco aarhus " majlis an-nuwwab / assemblee des representants " elects members for a five-year term , 295 elected in multi-seat constituencies and 30 in national lists consisting only of women .
the parliament 's powers , though still relatively limited , were expanded under the 1992 and 1996 and even further in the 2011 constitutional revisions and include budgetary matters , approving bills , questioning ministers , and establishing ad hoc commissions of inquiry to investigate the government 's actions .
the lower chamber of parliament may dissolve the government through a vote of no confidence .
compulsory military service in morocco has been suspended since september 2006 .
morocco 's military is made up of the royal armed forces .
the un maintains a small observer force in western sahara .
morocco is a member of the united nations .
morocco 's relationships vary greatly between african , arab , and western states .
morocco has had strong ties to the west in order to gain economic and political benefits .
from the total foreign investments in morocco , the european union invests approximately 73.5 % , whereas the arab world invests only 19.3 % .
morocco was the only african state not to be a member of the african union due to its unilateral withdrawal on 12 november 1984 .
morocco rejoined the au on 30 january 2017 .
a dispute with spain in 2002 over the small island of perejil revived the issue of the sovereignty of melilla and ceuta .
these small enclaves are surrounded by morocco and have been administered by spain for centuries .
morocco has been given the status of major non-nato ally by the us government .
due to the conflict over western sahara , the status of the saguia el-hamra and rio de oro regions is disputed .
the western sahara war was a rebel group from morocco and the sahrawi rebel national liberation movement .
a united nations mission , minurso , is to decide whether the territory should become independent or recognised as a part of morocco .
as of 2006 , no un member state has recognized moroccan sovereignty over western sahara .
the project was presented to the united nations security council in mid-april 2007 .
the proposal was encouraged by moroccan allies such as the united states , france and spain .
to examine the abuses committed during the reign of king hassan ii · 1961 – 1999 naples , the government has set up an equity and reconciliation commission pursuant ier eyre .
the sharp drop in repression of political dissidents came about because of rising international condemnation of morocco 's human rights record from other nations and human rights groups .
following worldwide criticism of its human rights record , hassan ii gradually liberated the country in order to avoid international isolation and tension with other nations .
since the current king of morocco , mohammed vi , took power in 1999 , the nation 's human rights record has improved significantly and is now among the best in africa and the arab world .
according to human rights watch annual report 2016 , moroccan authorities restricted the rights to peaceful expression , association and assembly through several laws .
the authorities continue to prosecute both printed and online media which criticizes the government or the king .
it is illegal to proselytise for any religion other than islam ; and that crime is punishable by a maximum of 15 years of imprisonment .
violence against women , forced marriage and sexual harassment has been criminalized .
the penalty can be from one month to five years .
since 1993 , the country has followed a policy of privatisation of certain economic sectors which used to be in the hands of the government .
morocco was ranked as the first african country by the economist intelligence unit 's quality-of-life index , ahead of south africa .
in the years since that first-place ranking was given , morocco has slipped into fourth place behind egypt .
the industries that made the highest growth are tourism , telecoms , information technology , and textile .
tourism is one of the most important sectors in the moroccan economy .
it is well developed with a strong tourist industry focused on the country 's coast , culture , and history .
morocco attracted more than 11 million tourists in 2017 .
tourism is the second largest foreign exchange earner in morocco after phosphate .
the moroccan government is heavily investing in tourism development , in 2010 the government launched its vision 2020 .
large government sponsored marketing campaigns to attract tourists advertised morocco as a cheap and exotic , place for tourists .
most of the visitors to morocco continue to be european .
morocco 's relatively high number of tourists has been helped by its location .
it was bought by the fashion designer yves saint laurent and pierre berge in 1980 .
their presence in the city helped boost the city 's profile as a tourist destination .
tourism in the atlas and rif mountains are the fastest growth area in moroccan tourism .
they are also developing desert tourism in competition with tunisia .
with a semi-arid climate and an ill-developed irrigation system , it is difficult to assure enough irrigation .
the main resources of the moroccan economy are agriculture , phosphates , and tourism .
morocco is the world 's third largest producer of phosphorus after china and the united states .
morocco suffers both from unemployment ; a large external debt is estimated at around $ 20 billion , or half of gdp in 2002 .
morocco runs a structural trade deficit .
however , as forecasts indicate that energy requirements in morocco will rise 6 % per year between 2012 and 2050 , a new law passed that will allow moroccans to look for ways to diversify the energy supply , including more renewable resources .
the moroccan government has launched a project to build a solar thermal energy plant .
morocco has embarked upon the construction of large solar energy farms to lessen dependence on fossil fuels , and to export electricity to europe .
since the 7th century , cannabis has been cultivated in the rif region .
according to a french ministry of the interior 2006 report , 80 % of the cannabis resinopers hashishiaceae consumed in europe come from the rif region in morocco .
it is also from the mediterranean in the south .
morocco is a transit point for cocaine from south america destined for western europe .
they range from private companies in the largest city , casablanca , the capital , rabat , and two other cities , to public municipal utilities in 13 other cities , as well as a national electricity and water company barake .
there have been substantial improvements in access to water supply , and to a lesser extent to sanitation over the past fifteen years .
the issue of lack of water connections for some of the urban poor is being addressed as part of the national human development initiative .
the moroccan government has been giving reforms to improve the quality of education and make research more responsive to socio-economic needs .
in may 2009 , morocco 's prime minister , abbas el fassi , announced greater support for science .
the aim was to give universities greater financial autonomy from the government to make them more responsive to research needs and better able to forge links with the private sector .
the idea is to create a network of players in innovation , including researchers , entrepreneurs , students and academics , to help them develop innovative projects .
the ministry of higher education and scientific research is supporting research in advanced technologies and the development of innovative cities in fez , rabat and marrakesh .
one example is the moroccan phosphate office cherifien des phosphatesraction , which has invested in a project to develop a smart city , king mohammed vi green city , around mohammed vi university located between casablanca and marrakesh , at a cost of dh 4.7 billionanor " circa $ 479 million tonnes .
since the first technopark was established in rabat in 2005 , a second has been set up in casablanca , followed , in 2015 by a third in tangers .
morocco has a comparative advantage and skilled human capital , including mining , fisheries , food chemistry and new technologies .
it also identified a number of strategic sectors , such as energy , with an emphasis on renewable energies such as photovoltaic , thermal solar energy , wind and biomass ; as well as the water , nutrition and health sectors , the environment and geosciences .
on 20 may 2015 , the higher council for education , training and scientific research gave a report to the king offering a " vision for education in morocco 2015 – 2030 " .
the report said that making education easier and more useful for making education easier .
according to the cia , 99 % of the population are arab-berber , with the remaining 1 % comprising other groups .
a large portion of the population is identified as haratin and gnawacek or gnaoua foley , west african or mixed race descendants of slaves , and moriscos , european muslims expelled from spain and portugal in the 17th century .
of these foreign-born residents , most were of french origin , followed by individuals mainly from various nations in west africa and algeria .
before independence , morocco was home to half a million europeans .
there are also large moroccan communities in spainport .
other large communities can be found in italy , canada , the united states , and israel .
the religious affiliation in the country is estimated by the pew forum in 2010 as 99 % muslim , with all remaining groups accounting for less than 1 % of the population .
there are about 3,000 to 8,000 shia muslims , most of them are foreign residents from lebanon or iraq , but also a few citizen converts .
followers of several sufi muslim orders across the maghreb and west africa do annual pilgrimages to the country .
some local christian leaders think that there may be as many as 8,000 christian citizens throughout the country , but many reportedly do not meet regularly due to fear of government surveillance and social persecution .
about 89.8 % of the whole population can communicate with some degree in arabic .
in 2008 , frederic deroche said that there were 12 million berber speakers , making up about 40 % of the population .
according to the 2004 census , 2.19 million moroccans spoke a foreign language other than french .
much of northern morocco receives spanish media , television signal and radio waves .
through moroccan history , it has hosted many people coming from eastucible phoenicians , jews and arabsaint , south africanstages sub-saharan africans ashore and northleton romans , andalusiansimov .
art and music festivals take place in all the country during the summer months .
morocco has set among its top goals the protection of its diverse legacy and the preservation of its cultural heritage .
it has been a strong part of the combining berber , jewish and arabic cultural heritage with external influences such as the french and the spanish .
the indigenous berber people and a series of foreign invaders as well as religious and cultural influences have shaped morocco 's architectural styles .
the vernacular architecture can range from ornate with colours to simple , clean lines with earth tones .
influences from the arab world , spain , portugal and france are seen in moroccan architecture .
under the almohad dynasty morocco experienced a period of wealth and brilliance of learning .
he founded a great library , which was eventually carried to the casbah and turned into a public library .
two main factors gave morocco a pulse toward seeing the birth of a modern literature .
morocco , as a french and spanish protectorate left moroccan intellectuals the opportunity to exchange and to produce literary works freely .
the first was the generation that lived and wrote during the protectorate jemison 1912 – 56orus .
the writers were an important influence the many moroccan novelists , poets and playwrights that were still to come .
moroccan literature flourished with novelists such as mohamed zafzaf and mohamed choukri , who wrote in arabic , and driss chraibi and tahar ben jelloun who wrote in french .
rock-influenced chaabi bands are widespread , as is trance music with historical origins in islamic music .
a music andalusian music and art is the idea of morisco visual artist / composer / composer / composer / oudist tarik banzi , founder of the al-andalus ensemble .
chaabi was originally performed in markets , but is now found at any celebration or meeting .
between that time and 1944 , many foreign movies were shot in the country , especially in the ouarzate area .
in 1944 , the moroccan cinematographic center bethel ccm foley , the nation 's film regulatory agency , was established .
in 1952 , orson welles ' " othello " won the palme d ' or at the cannes film festival under the moroccan flag .
in its current form , the event is held in tetouan .
moroccan cuisine is considered one of the most diversified cuisines in the world .
this is a result of the centuries long interaction of morocco with the outside world .
while spices have been imported to morocco for thousands of years , many ingredients such as saffron from tiliouine , mint and olives from meknes , and oranges and lemons from fez , are home-grown .
beef is the most commonly eaten red meat in morocco .
lamb is also eaten , but as northwest african sheep breeds store most of their fat in their tails .
among the most famous moroccan dishes are couscous , pastillatify also spelled bsteeya or bestillatify , tajine , tanjia and harira .
pork consumption is forbidden in accordance with sharia , religious laws of islam .
bread in morocco is made mostly from durum wheat semolina known as khobz .
the most common is wheat grain coarse ground or white flour bread .
the most popular drink is " atai " , green tea with mint leaves and other ingredients .
morocco was originally scheduled to host the 2015 africa cup of nations , but refused to host the tournament on the scheduled dates because of fears over the ebola outbreak on the continent .
morocco tried to host the fifa world cup but lost five times to the united states , france , germany , south africa and the united states .
as a result , moroccan rugby was tied to the fortunes of france , during the first and second world war , with many moroccan players going away to fight .
like other maghreb nations , moroccan rugby tended to look to europe for inspiration , rather than to the rest of africa .
in september 2006 , unesco awarded morocco along with other countries such as cuba , pakistan , india and turkey the " unesco 2006 literacy prize " .
morocco has more than four universities , institutes of higher learning , and polytechnics are spread at urban centers throughout the country .
its leading institutions include mohammed v university in rabat , the country 's largest university , with branches in casablanca and fes .
the al-qarawiyin university , founded by fatima al-fihri in the city of fez in 859 as a madrasa , is considered by unesco to be the oldest university of the world .
according to research published , in 2005 only 16 % of citizens in morocco had health insurance or coverage .
the government of morocco sets up surveillance systems within the already existing healthcare system to monitor and collect data .
mass education in hygiene is implemented in primary education schools .
the first reform was a mandatory health insurance plan for public and private sector employees to expand coverage from 16 percent of the population to 30 percent .
the country 's under-five death rate dropped by 60 % between 1990 and 2011 .
the present mortality rate is still very high , over seven times higher than in neighboring country spain .
the moroccan plan was started by the moroccan minister of health , dr . el houssaine louardi , and dr . ala alwan , who regional director for the eastern mediterranean region , on 13 november 2013 in rabat .
the nation 's maternal mortality ratio fell by 67 % between 1990 and 2010 .
spending on health and health accounted for 5.9 % of the country 's gdp .
morocco ranked 16th out of 29 countries on the global youth wellbeing index in 2017 .
moroccan youths have a lower self-harm rate than the global index by an average of 4 encounters per year .
63 % of youth say their standard of living will be better than their parents .
more effort is needed to increase access to health insurance , basic sanitation services and continue to lower infant and maternal mortality rates in the country .
the nation is taking steps to improve health and sets an example for other developing countries in the middle east and north africa .