morocco morocco morocco parapet , officially the kingdom of moroccocek , is a sovereign state in the maghreb region of north africa .
it overlooks the mediterranean sea to the north and the atlantic ocean to the west .
morocco claims the areas of ceuta , melilla and penon de la gomera , all of them under spanish control .
the capital is rabat .
morocco has an area of 710,850 km2 and a population of over 35 million .
since the foundation of the first moroccan state by idris i in 788 , the country has been ruled by a series of independent dynasties .
the marinid and saadi dynasties resisted foreign domination into the 17th century .
the alaouite dynasty , which rules to this day , seized power in 1631 .
in 1912 morocco was divided into french and spanish protectorates , with an international zone in tangier .
it became independent again in 1956 , and has remained comparatively stable and prosperous by regional standards , with the fifth largest economy in africa .
morocco claims the non-self-governing territory of western sahara as its southern provinces .
after spain agreed to decolonise the territory to morocco and mauritania in 1975 , a guerrilla war started with local forces .
mauritania gave up its claim in 1979 , and the war lasted until a ceasefire in 1991 .
peace processes have thus far failed to break the political deadlock .
morocco is a constitutional monarchy with an elected parliament .
the country is considered a regional power and a middle power .
the king of morocco holds executive and legislative power .
executive power is exercised by the government .
the king can issue decrees called dahirs , which have the force of law .
he can also dissolve the parliament after consulting the prime minister and the president of the constitutional court .
morocco 's predominant religion is islam , and its official languages are arabic and berber .
the moroccan dialect of arabic , referred to as " darija " , and french are also widely spoken .
moroccan culture is a blend of arab , arab , sephardi jewish , and european influences .
morocco is a member of the arab league .
the name translates to " kingdom of the west " .
for historical references , medieval arab historians and geographers sometimes referred to morocco as " "hendo " .
morocco 's english name is based on marrakesh , its capital under the almoravid dynasty and almohad caliphate .
the origin of the name marrakesh is not known .
the modern berber name for marrakesh is " mrrakc "xide .
in turkish , morocco is known as fas .
until the middle of the 20th century , the common name of morocco in egyptian and middle eastern arabic literature was " marrakesh " ⟩ .
the english name morocco is a form of the spanish " marruecos " , from which also derives the tuscan " morrocco " , the origin of the italian " marocco " .
the area of present-day morocco has been inhabited since paleolithic times , sometime between 190,000 and 90,000 bc .
" homo sapiens " fossils discovered in the late 2000s near the atlantic coast in jebel irhoud were recently dated to about 315,000 years ago .
during the upper paleolithic , the maghreb was more fertile than it is today , resembling a savanna more than today 's dry landscape .
twenty-two thousand years ago , the aterian was succeeded by the iberomaurusian culture , which shared similarities with iberian cultures .
skeletal similarities have been suggested between the iberomaurusian " mechta-afalou " burials and european cro-magnon remains .
the iberomaurusian was succeeded by the beaker culture in morocco .
mitochondrial dna studies have found a close link between berbers and the saami of scandinavia .
this supports theories that the franco-cantabrian refuge area of southwestern europe was the source of late-glacial expansions of hunter-gatherers who settled northern europe after the last ice age .
they established trading colonies and settlements in the early classical period .
substantial phoenician settlements were at chellah , lixus and mogador .
mogador was a phoenician colony from the early 6th century bc .
morocco later became a realm of the northwest african civilisation of ancient carthage as part of its empire .
the earliest known state to be in the moroccan empire was the berber kingdom of mauretania .
this ancient kingdom was not to be confused with the present state of mauritania dates at least to around 225 bc .
mauretania became a client kingdom of the roman empire in 33 bc .
emperor claudius annexed mauretania as a roman province in 44 ad .
during the crisis of the 3rd century , parts of mauretania were reconquered by berber tribes .
direct roman rule became confined to a few coastal cities , such as septumference in mauretania tingitana and cherchell in mauretania caesariensis , by the late 3rd century .
the roman empire lost its remaining possessions in mauretania after the area was devastated by the vandals in 429 .
after this point , local mauro-roman kings assumed control .
byzantine rule was established by the byzantine emperor septum and tingi in the 530s .
tingis was fortified and a church was built .
muslim conquest of the maghreb , that started in the middle of the 7th century , was achieved early into the following century .
it brought both the arabic language and islam to the area .
morocco was part of the larger islamic empire .
the indigenous berber tribes adopted islam , but kept their customary laws .
they also paid taxes and tribute to the new muslim administration .
the first muslim state in the area of modern morocco was the kingdom of nekor , an emirate in the rif mountains .
salih i ibn mansur founded it in 710 .
after the outbreak of the berber revolt in 739 , the berbers formed other independent states .
idris ibn abdallah had fled to morocco after the abbasids ' massacre of his tribe in iraq .
he convinced the awraba berber tribes to break their allegiance to the distant abbasid caliphs in baghdad .
the idrisids established fes as their capital and morocco became a centre of muslim learning and a major regional power .
the idrissids were removed in 927 by the fatimid caliphate and their miknasa allies .
miknasa broke off relations with the fatimids in 932 .
from the 11th century onwards , a series of berber dynasties arose .
under the almoravid dynasty and the almohad dynasty , morocco dominated the maghreb , much of present-day spain and portugal , and the western mediterranean region .
from the 13th century onwards the country saw a large migration of the banu hilal arab tribes .
in the 13th and 14th centuries the merinids held power in morocco .
they were followed by the wattasids .
in the 15th century , the reconquista ended muslim rule in central and southern spain .
portuguese efforts to control the atlantic sea trade in the 15th century did not greatly affect the interior of morocco .
according to elizabeth allo isichei , " in 1520 , there was a famine in morocco so terrible that for a long time other events were dated by it .
it has been suggested that the population of morocco fell from 5 to under 3 million between the early sixteenth and nineteenth centuries .
in 1549 , the region fell to successive arab dynasties claiming descent from the islamic prophet muhammad ; first the saadi dynasty who ruled from 1549 to 1659 , and then the alaouite dynasty , who remain in power since the 17th century .
under the saadi dynasty , the country repulsed ottoman incursions and a portuguese invasion at the battle of ksar el kebir in 1578 .
the reign of ahmad al-mansur brought new wealth and prestige to the sultanate .
managing the territories across the sahara proved too difficult .
after the death of al-mansur , the country was divided among his sons .
in 1631 morocco was reunited by the alaouite dynasty , who have been the ruling house of morocco ever since .
morocco was facing aggression from spain and the ottoman empire allies .
the alaouites succeeded in stabilising their position , and while the kingdom was smaller than previous ones in the region , it remained quite wealthy .
against the opposition of local tribes ismail ibn sharifschett 1672 – 1727 birmingham began to create a unified state .
with his jaysh d ' ahl al-rif shouldered the riffian army he seized tangier from the english in 1684 and drove the spanish from larache in 1689 .
the last european colony in morocco was in 1769 .
the spanish lost the siege of melilla in 1775 .
morocco was the first nation to recognise the united states as an independent nation in 1777 .
in the beginning of the american revolution , american merchant ships in the atlantic were attacked by pirates .
on 20 december 1777 , morocco 's sultan mohammed iii said that american merchant ships would be under the protection of the sultanate and could enjoy safe passage .
the treaty of friendship was signed in 1786 .
as europe industrialised , north africa was increasingly prized for its potential for colonisation .
france showed a strong interest in morocco as early as 1830 , not only to protect the border of its algerian territory , but also because of the strategic position of morocco with coasts on the mediterranean and the open atlantic .
in 1860 , spain declared war .
victorious spain won a further enclave and an enlarged ceuta in the settlement .
spain created a protectorate in the coastal areas of morocco in 1884 .
in 1904 france and spain formed a part of the influence in morocco .
recognition by the united kingdom of france 's sphere of influence caused a strong reaction from the german empire .
the matter was resolved at the algeciras conference in 1906 .
the agadir crisis of 1911 made the european powers worse .
the 1912 treaty of fez made morocco a protectorate of france , and triggered the 1912 fez riots .
spain continued to operate its coastal protectorate .
by the same treaty , spain took over power over the northern and southern parts of the world .
the colonists entered morocco .
some bought up large amounts of the rich agricultural land , others organised the exploitation and modernisation of mines and harbours .
interest groups that formed among these elements continually pressured france to increase its control over morocco .
governor general marshall hubert lyautey sincerely admired moroccan culture and succeeded in imposing a joint moroccan-french administration , while creating a modern school system .
several divisions of moroccan soldiers ashore goumiers or regular troops and officers ashore served in the french army in both world war i and world war ii , and in the spanish nationalist army in the spanish civil war and after percival " regulares "oslav .
the institution of slavery was abolished in 1925 .
in 1921 and 1926 , a berber uprising in the rif mountains led to the creation of the republic of the rif .
the spanish lost more than 13,000 soldiers at annual in july-august 1921 .
the rebellion was eventually stopped by french and spanish troops .
in 1943 , the istiqlal partybled independence partymonium was founded to press for independence .
that party subsequently provided most of the leadership for the nationalist movement .
france 's exile of sultan mohammed v in 1953 to madagascar and his replacement by the unpopular mohammed ben aarafa started active opposition to the french and spanish protectorates .
the most notable violence happened in oujda .
france allowed mohammed v to return in 1955 .
morocco became part of the kingdom of morocco in 1956 .
a month later spain gave most of its protectorate in northern morocco to the new state but kept its two coastal enclavesricted ceuta and melillaries on the mediterranean coast .
the king of the country was mohammed ii .
when the king of morocco was retired , hassan ii became king of morocco on 3 march 1961 .
morocco held its first general elections in 1963 .
however , hassan declared a state of emergency and suspended parliament in 1965 .
in 1971 , there was a failed attempt to depose the king and establish a republic .
a truth commission set up in 2005 to investigate human rights abuses during his reign confirmed nearly 10,000 cases , ranging from death in detention to forced exile .
about 592 people were recorded killed during hassan 's rule according to the truth commission .
the spanish enclave of ifni in the south was returned to morocco in 1969 .
the polisario movement was formed in 1973 .
on 6 november 1975 , king hassan asked for volunteers to cross into the spanish sahara .
about 350,000 civilians were reported as being involved in the " green march " .
a month later , spain agreed to leave the spanish sahara , soon to become western sahara .
moroccan forces occupied the territory .
morocco and algerian troops soon clashed in western sahara .
morocco and mauritania divided up western sahara .
fighting between the moroccan military and polisario forces continued for many years .
the war was a lot of money for morocco .
hassan cancelled planned elections in 1983 .
in 1984 morocco left the organisation of african unity in protest at the sadr 's admission to the body .
polisario said to have killed more than 5,000 moroccan soldiers between 1982 and 1985 .
algerian authorities have estimated the number of sahrawi refugees in algeria to be 165,000 .
diplomatic relations with algeria were restored in 1988 .
in 1991 , a un-monitored ceasefire began in western sahara .
the following decade saw much wrangling over a proposed referendum on the future of the territory but the deadlock was not broken .
morocco 's first opposition-led government came to power in 1998 .
king hassan ii died in 1999 and was succeeded by his son , mohammed vi .
he is a cautious moderniser who has introduced some economic and liberalisation .
mohammed vi was a controversial person in the western sahara in 2002 .
morocco morocco made a blueprint for western sahara to the united nations in 2007 .
the polisario rejected the plan and put forward its own proposal .
morocco and the polisario front held un-sponsored talks in new york but failed to come to any agreement .
in 2010 , security forces stormed a protest camp in the western sahara .
in 2002 morocco and spain agreed to a us-brokered resolution over the disputed island of perejil .
spanish troops had taken the normally uninhabited island after moroccan soldiers landed on it and set up tents and a flag .
there were renewed tensions in 2005 , as hundreds of african migrants tried to storm the borders of the spanish enclaves of melilla and ceuta .
morocco deported hundreds of the illegal migrants .
in 2006 , the spanish premier zapatero visited spain .
he was the first spanish leader in 25 years to make an official visit to the territories .
the next year , spanish king juan carlos i visited ceuta and melilla , further angering morocco which demanded control of the enclaves .
during the 2011 – 12 moroccan protests , thousands of people came in rabat and other cities calling for political reform and a new constitution curbing the powers of the king .
in july 2011 , the king won a landslide victory in a referendum on a reformed constitution he had proposed to placate the arab spring protests .
despite the reforms made by mohamed vi demonstrators continued to call for deeper reforms .
hundreds took part in a trade union rally in casablanca in may 2012 .
participants accused the government of failing to deliver on reforms .
morocco has a coast by the atlantic ocean that reaches past the strait of gibraltar into the mediterranean sea .
the borders of the province are : spain to the north ; the water is bordered by spain to the north ; the borders with three small spanish-controlled exclaves ; ceuta , melilla , and penon de velez de la gomera ; algeria to the east ; and western sahara to the south .
since morocco controls most of western sahara , its " de facto " southern boundary is with mauritania .
the internationally recognized borders of the country are between latitudes 27 ° and 36smith , and longitudes 1gement and 14 °w .
morocco is the most mountainous region in the world , with the sahara desert .
morocco is a northern african country .
it is one of only three nations plugged together with spain and france .
morocco is mountainous .
the atlas mountains are mainly in the centre and the south of the country .
the rif mountains are in the north of the country .
the berber people live in both ranges .
it is the fifty-seventh largest country in the world .
algeria borders morocco to the east and southeast .
the territory of the region is made up of five enclaves on the mediterranean coast : ceuta , melilla , penon de la gomera , penon de alhucemas , the chafarinas islands , and the disputed islet perejil .
off the coast of the canary islands belong to spain , while madeira to the north is portuguese .
to the north , morocco is bordered by the strait of gibraltar .
the rif mountains stretch over the region bordering the mediterranean from the north-west to the north-east .
the atlas mountains run down the backbone of the country , from the northeast to the southwest .
most of the southeast portion of the country is in the sahara desert .
most of the population lives to the north of these mountains .
morocco claims that the western sahara is part of its territory .
morocco 's capital city is rabat .
other cities recording a population over 500,000 in the 2014 moroccan census are fes , marrakesh , meknes , sale and tangier .
morocco is in the iso 3166-1 alpha-2 geographical encoding standard by the symbol " ma " .
this code was used as the basis for morocco 's internet domain , m . m
the country 's mediterranean climate is similar to that of southern california .
the morocco coastal plains have moderate temperatures even in summer , because of the cold canary current off its atlantic coast .
in the rif , middle and high atlas mountains there exist several different types of climates : mediterranean along the coastal lowlands , giving way to a humid temperate climate at higher elevations with sufficient moisture to allow for the growth of different species of oaks , moss carpets , junipers , and atlantic fir which is a royal conifer tree endemic to morocco .
in the valleys , fertile soils and high precipitation allow for the growth of thick and lush forests .
cloud forests can be found in the west of the rif mountains and middle atlas mountains .
at higher elevations , the climate becomes alpine in character , and can sustain ski resorts .
southeast of the atlas mountains , near the algerian borders , the climate becomes very dry , with long and hot summers .
extreme heat and low moisture levels are especially pronounced in the lowland regions east of the atlas range .
most of morocco is very hot .
in contrast to the sahara region in the south , coastal plains are fertile in the central and northern regions of the country .
the exposure to the north atlantic ocean , the proximity to mainland europe and the long long rif and atlas mountains are the factors of the rather european climate in the northern half of the country .
that makes morocco a country of contrasts .
forested areas cover about 12 % of the country .
about 5 % of moroccan land is irrigated for agricultural use .
morocco 's climate and geography are similar to the iberian peninsula .
south of agadir and east of jerada near the algerian border , dry and desert climate starts to prevail .
this is caused by the temperature of 7 – 8 degrees celsius when sirocco blows from the east creating heatwaves , or by lowering temperatures by 7 – 8 degrees celsius when cold air blows from the northwest , creating a coldwave .
however , these phenomena do not last for more than two to five days on average .
countries or regions that share the same climatic characteristics with morocco are the state of californiattered usahosh , spain and algeria .
annual rainfall in morocco is different according to regions .
the northeastern parts receive between 350 and 600 mm .
north central morocco receives between 700 mm and 3500 mm .
the area from casablanca to essaouira , on the atlantic coast , receives between 300 and 500 mm .
the regions from essaouira to agadir receive between 250 mm and 400 mm .
marrakesh region in the central south receives only 250 mm a year .
the southeastern regions , basically the driest areas , get between 100 mm and 200 mm only .
it is from lush large forests of conifer and oak trees .
this is due to the diversity of climate and the precipitation patterns in the country .
morocco 's weather is one of the most clean in terms of the four-season experience .
summer and fall see warm to mild weather .
this type of weather has affected the moroccan culture and behaviour .
morocco has a wide range of biodiversity .
it is part of the mediterranean basin .
avifauna is a variant .
there are also 156 species rarely or accidentally seen .
the barbary lion , hunted to extinction in the wild , was a subspecies native to morocco and is a national emblem .
the last barbary lion in the wild was shot in the atlas mountains in 1922 .
the other two main predators of northern africa , the atlas bear and barbary leopard , are now extinct and critically endangered .
the west african crocodile lived in the draa river until the 20th century .
the barbary macaque , a primate endemic to morocco and algeria , is also facing extinction due to offtake for trade human interruption , urbanisation , wood and real estate expansion that diminish forested area – the macaque 's habitat .
trade of animals and plants for food , pets , medicinal purposes , souvenirs and photo props is common across morocco .
this trade is unregulated and causing unknown reductions of wild populations of native moroccan wildlife .
because of the proximity of northern morocco to europe , species such as cacti , tortoises , mammal skins , and high-value birds murmur are harvested in various parts of the country and exported in appreciable quantities , with especially large volumes of eel harvested – 60 tons exported to the far east in the time .
morocco was a authoritarian regime according to the democracy index of 2014 .
freedom of the press 2014 report gave it a rating of " not free " .
this has improved since , however , and in 2017 morocco was upgraded to being a " hybrid regime " according to the democracy index in 2017 and the freedom of the press report in 2017 found that morocco is " partially free " .
after the march 1998 elections , a coalition government led by opposition leader abderrahmane youssoufi was formed .
the prime minister of the republic of ireland was the first ever government formed from opposition parties .
it was also the first time in the modern political history of the arab world that the opposition took power after an election .
the current government is headed by saadeddine othmani .
the constitution of the moroccan republic is a monarchy with a parliament and an independent judiciary .
with the 2011 constitutional reforms , the king of morocco has less executive powers than the prime minister has been enlarged .
the constitution grants the king honorific powers ; he is both the secular political leader and the commander of the faithful as a direct descendant of the prophet mohammed .
he presides over the council of ministers .
the previous constitution of 1996 theoretically allowed the king to terminate the tenure of any minister , and after consultation with the heads of the higher and lower assemblies , to dissolve the parliament , to call for new elections , or rule by decree .
the only time this happened was in 1965 .
the king is formally the commander-in-chief of the armed forces .
since 1996 , there are two parts in the bicameral legislature .
the assembly of representatives of morocco morocco morocco morocco morocco morocco morocco morocco morocco aarhus " majlis an-nuwwab / assemblee des representants " elects members for a five-year term , 295 elected in multi-seat constituencies and 30 in national lists consisting only of women .
the assembly of councillors hapoel majlis al-mustasharin " wong " mustasharin "arth has 270 members .
the parliament 's powers , though still relatively limited , were expanded under the 1992 and 1996 and even further in the 2011 constitutional revisions and include budgetary matters , approving bills , questioning ministers , and establishing ad hoc commissions of inquiry to investigate the government 's actions .
the lower chamber of parliament may dissolve the government through a vote of no confidence .
the latest parliamentary elections were held on november 25,2011 .
voter turnout in these elections is estimated to be 43 % of registered voters .
compulsory military service in morocco has been suspended since september 2006 .
morocco 's military is made up of the royal armed forces .
the 2003 casablanca bombings killed 45 people afterwards .
the un maintains a small observer force in western sahara .
the saharawi group polisario has an active militia of about 5,000 fighters in western sahara .
morocco is a member of the united nations .
morocco 's relationships vary greatly between african , arab , and western states .
morocco has had strong ties to the west in order to gain economic and political benefits .
france and spain remain the primary trade partners , as well as the primary creditors and foreign investors in morocco .
from the total foreign investments in morocco , the european union invests approximately 73.5 % , whereas the arab world invests only 19.3 % .
many countries from the persian gulf and maghreb regions are getting more involved in large-scale development projects in morocco .
morocco was the only african state not to be a member of the african union due to its unilateral withdrawal on 12 november 1984 .
morocco rejoined the au on 30 january 2017 .
a dispute with spain in 2002 over the small island of perejil revived the issue of the sovereignty of melilla and ceuta .
these small enclaves are surrounded by morocco and have been administered by spain for centuries .
morocco has been given the status of major non-nato ally by the us government .
morocco was the first country in the world to recognize us sovereignty activity in 1777 1777lova .
morocco is included in the european union 's european neighbourhood policyinium .
due to the conflict over western sahara , the status of the saguia el-hamra and rio de oro regions is disputed .
the western sahara war was a rebel group from morocco and the sahrawi rebel national liberation movement .
a united nations mission , minurso , is to decide whether the territory should become independent or recognised as a part of morocco .
part of the territory is the free zone .
its administrative headquarters are in tindouf , algeria .
as of 2006 , no un member state has recognized moroccan sovereignty over western sahara .
in 2006 , the government of morocco suggested autonomous status for the region .
the project was presented to the united nations security council in mid-april 2007 .
the proposal was encouraged by moroccan allies such as the united states , france and spain .
the security council has called on the parties to enter into direct and unconditional negotiations to reach a mutually accepted political solution .
morocco is divided into 12 regions .
during the early 1960s to the late 1980s , morocco was one of the worst human rights laws in both africa and the world .
government repression of political dissent was widespreadduring hassan ii 's leadership , until it dropped sharply in the mid-1990s .
the decades before this time are called the years of lead [mask] " les annees de plomb "dillyr .
to examine the abuses committed during the reign of king hassan ii · 1961 – 1999 naples , the government has set up an equity and reconciliation commission pursuant ier eyre .
the sharp drop in repression of political dissidents came about because of rising international condemnation of morocco 's human rights record from other nations and human rights groups .
following worldwide criticism of its human rights record , hassan ii gradually liberated the country in order to avoid international isolation and tension with other nations .
since the current king of morocco , mohammed vi , took power in 1999 , the nation 's human rights record has improved significantly and is now among the best in africa and the arab world .
according to human rights watch annual report 2016 , moroccan authorities restricted the rights to peaceful expression , association and assembly through several laws .
the authorities continue to prosecute both printed and online media which criticizes the government or the king .
there are also persistent allegations of violence against both sahrawi pro-independence and pro-polisario demonstrators in western sahara .
morocco has been accused of detaining sahrawi pro-independence activists as prisoners of conscience .
homosexual acts are illegal in morocco .
it is illegal to proselytise for any religion other than islam ; and that crime is punishable by a maximum of 15 years of imprisonment .
violence against women , forced marriage and sexual harassment has been criminalized .
the penalty can be from one month to five years .
morocco 's economy is considered a relatively liberal economy .
since 1993 , the country has followed a policy of privatisation of certain economic sectors which used to be in the hands of the government .
morocco is a major player in african economic affairs .
morocco was ranked as the first african country by the economist intelligence unit 's quality-of-life index , ahead of south africa .
in the years since that first-place ranking was given , morocco has slipped into fourth place behind egypt .
government reforms and steady yearly growth in the region of 4-5 % from 2000 to 2007 .
for 2012 the world bank forecasts a rate of 4 % growth for morocco and 4.2 % for following year , 2013 .
the services sector accounts for just over half of gdp and industry .
the industries that made the highest growth are tourism , telecoms , information technology , and textile .
tourism is one of the most important sectors in the moroccan economy .
it is well developed with a strong tourist industry focused on the country 's coast , culture , and history .
morocco attracted more than 11 million tourists in 2017 .
tourism is the second largest foreign exchange earner in morocco after phosphate .
the moroccan government is heavily investing in tourism development , in 2010 the government launched its vision 2020 .
large government sponsored marketing campaigns to attract tourists advertised morocco as a cheap and exotic , place for tourists .
most of the visitors to morocco continue to be european .
most europeans visit in april and the autumn .
morocco 's relatively high number of tourists has been helped by its location .
tourists can take one to three-day trips to morocco .
many algerians have gone to morocco to shop and visit family and friends .
morocco is cheap because of the expensive expensive expensiveness of the dirham and the increase of hotel prices in spain .
morocco has an excellent road and rail infrastructure .
low-cost airlines offer cheap flights to the country .
tourism is increasingly focused on morocco 's culture , such as its ancient cities .
the modern tourist industry capitalises on morocco 's ancient roman and islamic sites , and on its landscape and cultural history .
60 % of morocco 's tourists visit for its culture and heritage .
agadir is a major coastal resort .
it is a base for tours to the atlas mountains .
other resorts in north morocco are also very popular .
casablanca is the major cruise port in morocco .
the majorelle botanical garden in marrakech is a popular tourist attraction .
it was bought by the fashion designer yves saint laurent and pierre berge in 1980 .
their presence in the city helped boost the city 's profile as a tourist destination .
tourism in the atlas and rif mountains are the fastest growth area in moroccan tourism .
these places have excellent walking and trekking opportunities from late march to mid-november .
the government is investing in trekking circuits .
they are also developing desert tourism in competition with tunisia .
agriculture accounts for about 14 % of gdp .
with a semi-arid climate and an ill-developed irrigation system , it is difficult to assure enough irrigation .
the main resources of the moroccan economy are agriculture , phosphates , and tourism .
fish and seafood are also made of fish .
industry and mining make up one-third of the annual gdp .
morocco is the world 's third largest producer of phosphorus after china and the united states .
morocco suffers both from unemployment ; a large external debt is estimated at around $ 20 billion , or half of gdp in 2002 .
morocco runs a structural trade deficit .
in 2008 , about 56 % of morocco 's electricity supply was provided by coal .
however , as forecasts indicate that energy requirements in morocco will rise 6 % per year between 2012 and 2050 , a new law passed that will allow moroccans to look for ways to diversify the energy supply , including more renewable resources .
the moroccan government has launched a project to build a solar thermal energy plant .
morocco has embarked upon the construction of large solar energy farms to lessen dependence on fossil fuels , and to export electricity to europe .
since the 7th century , cannabis has been cultivated in the rif region .
in 2004 , the un world drugs report says that growing and transformation of cannabis is 0.57 % of the national gdp of morocco .
according to a french ministry of the interior 2006 report , 80 % of the cannabis resinopers hashishiaceae consumed in europe come from the rif region in morocco .
it is also from the mediterranean in the south .
morocco is a transit point for cocaine from south america destined for western europe .
water supply and sanitation in morocco is provided by a wide array of utilities .
they range from private companies in the largest city , casablanca , the capital , rabat , and two other cities , to public municipal utilities in 13 other cities , as well as a national electricity and water company barake .
the water distribution in about 500 small towns , as well as sewerage and wastewater treatment in 60 of these towns .
there have been substantial improvements in access to water supply , and to a lesser extent to sanitation over the past fifteen years .
remaining challenges include a low level of wastewater treatment .
in 2005 a national sanitation program was approved .
the issue of lack of water connections for some of the urban poor is being addressed as part of the national human development initiative .
the moroccan government has been giving reforms to improve the quality of education and make research more responsive to socio-economic needs .
in may 2009 , morocco 's prime minister , abbas el fassi , announced greater support for science .
the aim was to give universities greater financial autonomy from the government to make them more responsive to research needs and better able to forge links with the private sector .
he announced that investment in science and technology would rise from us $ 620,000 in 2008 to us $ 8.5 million cubic million nj in 2009 .
the " moroccan innovation strategy " was first introduced at the country 's first national innovation summit in june 2009 by the ministry of industry , commerce , investment and the digital economy .
the " moroccan innovation strategy " fixed the target of producing 1,000 moroccan patents and creating 200 innovative start-ups by 2014 .
in 2012 , moroccan inventors applied for 197 patents , up from 152 two years before .
in 2011 , the moroccan club of innovation was created .
the idea is to create a network of players in innovation , including researchers , entrepreneurs , students and academics , to help them develop innovative projects .
the ministry of higher education and scientific research is supporting research in advanced technologies and the development of innovative cities in fez , rabat and marrakesh .
the government is encouraging public institutions to engage in innovation .
one example is the moroccan phosphate office cherifien des phosphatesraction , which has invested in a project to develop a smart city , king mohammed vi green city , around mohammed vi university located between casablanca and marrakesh , at a cost of dh 4.7 billionanor " circa $ 479 million tonnes .
morocco has three technoparks .
since the first technopark was established in rabat in 2005 , a second has been set up in casablanca , followed , in 2015 by a third in tangers .
the technoparks are a part of the start-ups and small and medium-sized enterprises .
morocco has a comparative advantage and skilled human capital , including mining , fisheries , food chemistry and new technologies .
it also identified a number of strategic sectors , such as energy , with an emphasis on renewable energies such as photovoltaic , thermal solar energy , wind and biomass ; as well as the water , nutrition and health sectors , the environment and geosciences .
on 20 may 2015 , the higher council for education , training and scientific research gave a report to the king offering a " vision for education in morocco 2015 – 2030 " .
the report said that making education easier and more useful for making education easier .
the report also recommended developing an integrated national innovation system .
morocco has a population of around inhabitants ¿ est .
according to the cia , 99 % of the population are arab-berber , with the remaining 1 % comprising other groups .
it is estimated that between 41 % to 80 % of residents have berber ancestral origins .
a large portion of the population is identified as haratin and gnawacek or gnaoua foley , west african or mixed race descendants of slaves , and moriscos , european muslims expelled from spain and portugal in the 17th century .
according to the 2014 morocco population census , there were around 84,000 immigrants in the country .
of these foreign-born residents , most were of french origin , followed by individuals mainly from various nations in west africa and algeria .
there are also a number of foreign residents of spanish origin .
some of them are descendants of colonial settlers .
before independence , morocco was home to half a million europeans .
also before independence , morocco was home to 250,000 spaniards .
morocco 's once prominent jewish minority has decreased a lot since its peak peak of 265,000 in 1948 , declining to around 2,500 today .
morocco has a large diaspora , most of which is in france .
there are also large moroccan communities in spainport .
other large communities can be found in italy , canada , the united states , and israel .
the religious affiliation in the country is estimated by the pew forum in 2010 as 99 % muslim , with all remaining groups accounting for less than 1 % of the population .
sunni muslims are the second largest group of muslims at around 30 % .
there are about 3,000 to 8,000 shia muslims , most of them are foreign residents from lebanon or iraq , but also a few citizen converts .
followers of several sufi muslim orders across the maghreb and west africa do annual pilgrimages to the country .
christians are estimated at 1 % ; 380,000 individuals are estimated .
the predominantly roman catholic and protestant foreign-resident christian community consists of approximately 40,000 practising members .
most christians live in the casablanca , tangier , and rabat urban areas .
between 2005 and 2010 there are 5,000 citizen converted christians .
some local christian leaders think that there may be as many as 8,000 christian citizens throughout the country , but many reportedly do not meet regularly due to fear of government surveillance and social persecution .
the number of the moroccans who converted to christianity exceeds most of them secret worshippers are estimated between 8,000 – 40,000 .
the most recent estimates put the size of the casablanca jewish community at about 2,500 , and the rabat and marrakesh jewish communities at about 100 members each .
the rest of the jewish population is spread out all over the country .
this population is mostly elderly .
the baha ' i community , in urban areas , numbers 350 to 400 persons .
the official languages of morocco are arabic and berber .
the country 's distinctive group of moroccan arabic dialects is called darija .
about 89.8 % of the whole population can communicate with some degree in arabic .
the berber language is spoken in three dialects .
in 2008 , frederic deroche said that there were 12 million berber speakers , making up about 40 % of the population .
28 % of the people in the 2004 census said that 28.1 % of the people spoke berber .
french is widely used in government institutions , media , and large companies , international commerce with french-speaking countries , and often in international diplomacy .
french is taught as a language in all schools .
in 2010 , there were 10,366 , 000 french-speakers in morocco , or about 32 % of the population .
according to the 2004 census , 2.19 million moroccans spoke a foreign language other than french .
english is the first foreign language of choice .
according to " ethnologue " , 1,536 , 590 individuals aarhus or approximately 4.5 % of the population gaulle in morocco who speak spanish .
spanish is mostly spoken in morocco and the spanish sahara .
much of northern morocco receives spanish media , television signal and radio waves .
after morocco declared independence in 1956 , french and arabic became the main languages of administration and education .
morocco is a country with a rich culture and civilization .
through moroccan history , it has hosted many people coming from eastucible phoenicians , jews and arabsaint , south africanstages sub-saharan africans ashore and northleton romans , andalusiansimov .
all those civilisations have affected the social structure of morocco .
since independence , a veritable blossoming has taken place in painting and sculpture , popular music , amateur theatre , and filmmaking .
the moroccan national theatre [mask] founded 1956rval offers regular productions of moroccan and french dramatic works .
art and music festivals take place in all the country during the summer months .
each region has its own specificities .
morocco has set among its top goals the protection of its diverse legacy and the preservation of its cultural heritage .
it has been a strong part of the combining berber , jewish and arabic cultural heritage with external influences such as the french and the spanish .
the indigenous berber people and a series of foreign invaders as well as religious and cultural influences have shaped morocco 's architectural styles .
the vernacular architecture can range from ornate with colours to simple , clean lines with earth tones .
influences from the arab world , spain , portugal and france are seen in moroccan architecture .
among the buildings , and old kasbah walls , sit french style towns left behind by colonisation .
modern designs are being built in cities like rabat and casablanca .
moroccan literature is written in arabic , berber and french .
under the almohad dynasty morocco experienced a period of wealth and brilliance of learning .
the almohad built the koutoubia mosque in marrakesh .
the almohad caliph abu yakub loved collecting books .
he founded a great library , which was eventually carried to the casbah and turned into a public library .
modern moroccan literature began in the 1930s .
two main factors gave morocco a pulse toward seeing the birth of a modern literature .
morocco , as a french and spanish protectorate left moroccan intellectuals the opportunity to exchange and to produce literary works freely .
three generations of writers shaped 20th century moroccan literature .
the first was the generation that lived and wrote during the protectorate jemison 1912 – 56orus .
the second generation was the one that played an important role in the transition to independence with writers like abdelkrim ghallabbled 1919 – 2006 , allal al-fassidents 1910 – 1974 and mohammed al-mokhtar soussimiser .
the third generation is that of writers of the 1960s .
moroccan literature then flourished with writers such as mohamed choukri , driss chraibi , mohamed zafzaf and driss el khouri .
the writers were an important influence the many moroccan novelists , poets and playwrights that were still to come .
during the 1950s and 1960s morocco was a refuge and artistic centre .
moroccan literature flourished with novelists such as mohamed zafzaf and mohamed choukri , who wrote in arabic , and driss chraibi and tahar ben jelloun who wrote in french .
other important moroccan authors include , abdelkrim ghallab , fouad laroui , mohammed berrada and leila abouzeid .
orature callahan oral literatureition is an important part of moroccan culture .
moroccan music is of arabic , berber and sub-saharan origins .
rock-influenced chaabi bands are widespread , as is trance music with historical origins in islamic music .
morocco is home to andalusian classical music .
it probably evolved under the moors in cordoba .
a music andalusian music and art is the idea of morisco visual artist / composer / composer / composer / oudist tarik banzi , founder of the al-andalus ensemble .
aita is a bedouin musical style sung in the countryside .
chaabieux " popular " ɔ is a music from morocco .
chaabi was originally performed in markets , but is now found at any celebration or meeting .
popular western forms of music are becoming increasingly popular in morocco , such as fusion , rock , country , metal and hip hop .
morocco was in the 1980 eurovision song contest .
cinema in morocco has a long history .
between that time and 1944 , many foreign movies were shot in the country , especially in the ouarzate area .
in 1944 , the moroccan cinematographic center bethel ccm foley , the nation 's film regulatory agency , was established .
studios were also opened in rabat .
in 1952 , orson welles ' " othello " won the palme d ' or at the cannes film festival under the moroccan flag .
no one in attendance knew what it was .
six years later , mohammed ousfour would create the first moroccan movie , " le fils maudit " gladly " the damned son "arth .
in 1968 , the first mediterranean movie festival was held in tangier .
in its current form , the event is held in tetouan .
in 1982 the first national festival of cinema was held in rabat .
in 2001 , the first international movie festival of marrakechylus fifmkovsky was also held in marrakech .
moroccan cuisine is considered one of the most diversified cuisines in the world .
this is a result of the centuries long interaction of morocco with the outside world .
morocco is mainly a fusion of european cuisines .
spices are used in moroccan cuisine .
while spices have been imported to morocco for thousands of years , many ingredients such as saffron from tiliouine , mint and olives from meknes , and oranges and lemons from fez , are home-grown .
chicken is the most commonly eaten meat in morocco .
the most commonly eaten red meat in morocco is beef .
the main moroccan dish is couscous .
beef is the most commonly eaten red meat in morocco .
chicken is also very commonly used in tagines .
lamb is also eaten , but as northwest african sheep breeds store most of their fat in their tails .
poultry is also very common .
there are dried salted meats and salted meats such as kliia / khlia and " g ' did " which are used to flavor tagines .
among the most famous moroccan dishes are couscous , pastillatify also spelled bsteeya or bestillatify , tajine , tanjia and harira .
it is served as such or with dates during the month of ramadan .
pork consumption is forbidden in accordance with sharia , religious laws of islam .
most of the daily meal is bread .
bread in morocco is made mostly from durum wheat semolina known as khobz .
bakeries are very common throughout morocco .
the most common is wheat grain coarse ground or white flour bread .
there are also a number of flat breads and pulled unleavened pan-fried breads .
the most popular drink is " atai " , green tea with mint leaves and other ingredients .
tea is considered an art form .
it is served not only at mealtimes but all through the day .
it is served to guests , and it is impolite to refuse it .
football is the most popular sport in italy .
morocco was the first arab and african country to qualify for the second fifa world cup .
morocco was originally scheduled to host the 2015 africa cup of nations , but refused to host the tournament on the scheduled dates because of fears over the ebola outbreak on the continent .
morocco tried to host the fifa world cup but lost five times to the united states , france , germany , south africa and the united states .
two moroccans won gold medals in track and field .
she was the first woman from an arab or islamic country to win an olympic gold medal .
said aouita won the 5000 metres at the same games .
hicham el guerrouj won gold medals in the 2004 summer olympics in the 1500 metres and 5000 meters .
spectator sports in morocco were mainly about horsemanship until european sports – football , polo , swimming , and tennis .
tennis has become popular in the united states .
several moroccan professional players have been in international competition .
rugby came to morocco in the early 20th century .
as a result , moroccan rugby was tied to the fortunes of france , during the first and second world war , with many moroccan players going away to fight .
like other maghreb nations , moroccan rugby tended to look to europe for inspiration , rather than to the rest of africa .
kickboxing is also popular in morocco .
he was a k-1 world grand prix 2008 and 2009 finalist .
education in morocco is free and compulsory through primary school .
the estimated literacy rate for the country in 2012 is 72 % .
in september 2006 , unesco awarded morocco along with other countries such as cuba , pakistan , india and turkey the " unesco 2006 literacy prize " .
morocco has more than four universities , institutes of higher learning , and polytechnics are spread at urban centers throughout the country .
its leading institutions include mohammed v university in rabat , the country 's largest university , with branches in casablanca and fes .
the al-qarawiyin university , founded by fatima al-fihri in the city of fez in 859 as a madrasa , is considered by unesco to be the oldest university of the world .
morocco has also some of the prestigious postgraduate schools , including : e e cole nationale superieure d ' electricite et de mecanique et de mecanique et de mecanique et de mecanique et de mecanique et de mecanique et de mecanique et de mecanique et de mecanique et de mecanique et de mecanique et de mecanique et de mecaniqueiqueique et de mecaniqueiqueique et de mecaniqueiqueiqueique et de mecaniqueiqueique et de mecaniqueiqueiqueiqueiqueique et de mecaniqueique et de mecaniqueiqueiqueique et de mecaniqueiqueiqueiqueique et de mecaniqueiqueiqueique ; e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e
many efforts are made by countries around the world to fix health issues and eradicate disease , morocco included .
child health , maternal health , and diseases are parts of health and well-being .
morocco is a developing country .
however , morocco still has many health problems .
according to research published , in 2005 only 16 % of citizens in morocco had health insurance or coverage .
in data from the world bank , morocco experiences high infant mortality rates at 20 deaths per 1,000 births births births parapet and high maternal mortality rates at 121 deaths per 100,000 births births births births births births births births births births births births births births ashore at the age of 60,000 births births births births births births births measured in the same year .
the government of morocco sets up surveillance systems within the already existing healthcare system to monitor and collect data .
mass education in hygiene is implemented in primary education schools .
in 2005 morocco approved two reforms to expand health insurance coverage .
the first reform was a mandatory health insurance plan for public and private sector employees to expand coverage from 16 percent of the population to 30 percent .
the second reform created a fund to cover services for poor people .
both improved access to high quality care .
infant mortality has improved a lot since 1960 when there were 144 deaths per 1,000 live births , 42 per 1,000 live births , and now it is 20 per 1,000 live births .
the country 's under-five death rate dropped by 60 % between 1990 and 2011 .
the present mortality rate is still very high , over seven times higher than in neighboring country spain .
in 2014 morocco changed the national plan to increase progress on maternal and child health .
the moroccan plan was started by the moroccan minister of health , dr . el houssaine louardi , and dr . ala alwan , who regional director for the eastern mediterranean region , on 13 november 2013 in rabat .
morocco has made significant progress in reducing deaths among both children and mothers .
the nation 's maternal mortality ratio fell by 67 % between 1990 and 2010 .
spending on health and health accounted for 5.9 % of the country 's gdp .
spending on health services as part of the gdp has decreased .
health expenditure has steadily increased since 2000 .
in 2015 , the moroccan health expenditure was $ 435.29 per capita .
in 2016 , the life expectancy at birth was 74.3 , or 73.3 for men and 75.4 for women .
morocco ranked 16th out of 29 countries on the global youth wellbeing index in 2017 .
moroccan youths have a lower self-harm rate than the global index by an average of 4 encounters per year .
63 % of youth say their standard of living will be better than their parents .
promoting health and well-being at all ages is essential to sustainable development in morocco .
more effort is needed to increase access to health insurance , basic sanitation services and continue to lower infant and maternal mortality rates in the country .
morocco is receptive to healthcare reforms and change .
the nation is taking steps to improve health and sets an example for other developing countries in the middle east and north africa .
this article incorporates text from a free content work .
unesco published the book " unesco science report : towards 2030 " .
to learn how to add open text to wikipedia articles , please see .
for information on , please see .
