the united nations passed the convention on 10 december 1948 .
the declaration was the first step in the process of creating the international bill of human rights , which was completed in 1966 .
some legal scholars have argued that countries have constantly invoked the declaration for more than 50 years .
however , in the united states , the supreme court in " sosa v . alvarez-machain "rricular 2004duced that the declaration " does not of its own force impose obligations as a matter of international law . "
the second draft was made by rene cassin .
these articles are concerned with the duty of the individual to society and the prohibition of use of rights in contravention of the purposes of the united nations organisation .
the united nations charter " reaffirmed faith in fundamental human rights , and dignity and worth of the human person " .
when the atrocities committed by nazi germany became fully apparent after world war ii , the consensus within the world community was that the united nations charter did not sufficiently define the rights to which it referred .
a universal declaration was needed .
the commission , a standing body of the united nations , was made to undertake the work of preparing what was initially conceived as an international bill of rights .
the commission established a special universal declaration of human rights drafting committee , chaired by eleanor roosevelt , to write the articles of the declaration .
canadian john peters humphrey , director of the division of human rights within the united nations secretariat , was called upon by the united nations secretary-general to work on the project and became the declaration 's main drafter .
humphrey was appointed director of the division of human rights within the united nations secretariat .
other well-known members of the drafting committee included rene cassin of france , charles malik of lebanon , and p . c . chang of the republic of china .
according to allan carlson , the declaration 's pro-family phrases were the result of the christian democratic movement 's influence on cassin and malik .
the commission on human rights , the economic and social council , was discussed by the third committee of the general assembly before being put to vote in december 1948 .
the united nations made the universal declaration of december 1948 .
south africa 's position was an attempt to protect apartheid .
the saudi arabian delegation 's abstention was prompted primarily by two of the declaration 's articles : article 18 , which states that everyone has the right " to change his religion or belief " ; and article 16 , on equal marriage rights .
eleanor roosevelt said that the soviet union should not leave their countries .
other countries only gained sovereignty and joined the united nations later .
the declaration of human rights day is celebrated every december 10 , the anniversary of the adoption of the universal declaration .
decadal commemorations are often accompanied by campaigns to promote awareness of the declaration and human rights .
in 2008 , the united nations made the 60th anniversary of the declaration .
eleanor roosevelt supported the adoption of the declaration as a declaration rather than as a treaty .
for the first time in international law , the term “ the rule of law ” was used in the preamble of the declaration .
the third paragraph of the declaration reads as follows : " whereas it is essential , if man is not to have recourse , as a last resort , to rebellion against tyranny and oppression , that human rights should be protected by the rule of law . "
the united nations charter is binding on all member states .
the united nations held the declaration in 1968 .
the declaration continues to be widely cited by governments , academics , advocates , and constitutional courts , and by individuals who appeal to its principles for the protection of their recognised human rights .
eleanor roosevelt — first chairwoman of the commission on human rights — stated that it may well become the international magna carta of all men . ”
in 1995 , pope john paul ii gave the declaration " one of the highest expressions of the human conscience of our time " .
in december 2003 , the european union gave the declaration " placed human rights at the centre of the framework of principles and obligations shaping relations within the international community . "
however , the same year , saudi arabia abstained from the ratification vote on the declaration , claiming that it violated sharia law .
in 1982 , the iranian representative to the united nations said that the declaration was " a secular understanding of the judeo-christian tradition " .
on 30 june 2000 , members of the organisation of the islamic conference formally resolved to support the cairo declaration on human rights in islam .
for example , iraqi diplomat bedia afnan agreed to use the wording that recognized gender equality resulted in article 3 within the iccpr and icescr .
the basic idea of human rights to be the highest , or sole , model , of a charter of equality and liberty for all human beings is that given the western origin and orientation of this declaration , the " universality " of the assumptions on which it is based on the very leastproble and subject to questioning .
furthermore , the idea of human rights and religion in general , or particular religions such as islam , needs to be examined in an unbiased way .
kutty writes : " a strong argument can be made that the current formulation of international human rights constitutes a cultural structure in which western society finds itself easily at home .
it is important to acknowledge and appreciate that other societies may have equally valid alternative conceptions of human rights .
ironically , a number of islamic countries that , as of 2014 , are among the most resistant to un intervention in domestic affairs , played an invaluable role in the creation of the declaration .
amnesty international and war resisters international have wanted " the right to refuse to kill " to be added to the universal declaration .
war resisters international has stated that the right to conscientious objection to military service is based on .
sean macbride , assistant secretary-general of the united nations and nobel peace prize winners , has said : " to the rights enshrined in the universal declaration of human rights one more might , with relevance , be added .
the aaa warned that the document would be defining universal rights from a western paradigm which would be unfair to countries outside of that scope .
they proposed three notes for consideration : " 1 .
standards and values are relative to the culture from which they derive so that any attempt to formulate postulates that grow out of the beliefs or moral codes of one culture must to that extent detract from the applicability of any declaration of human rights to mankind as a whole . "
in 1993 , the world conference on human rights was held .
they said that they wanted the need for universality , objectivity , and non-selectivity of human rights .
they called for greater emphasis on economic , social , and cultural rights .
bangkok declaration is considered to be a landmark of the asian values perspective .
the article 5 also states that " no one shall be subjected to torture or to cruel , inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment . "
amnesty international celebrated human rights day and the 60th anniversary of the universal declaration all over the world by organizing the " fire up ! "
the quaker united nations office and the american friends service committee work on many human rights issues .
the purpose of yhri is to teach youth about human rights , specifically the united nations universal declaration of human rights , and inspire them to become advocates for tolerance and peace .
