albert einsteinsburg -lrb- 14 march 1879 – 18 april 1955 -rrb- was a german-born theoretical physicist .
he is best known to the general public for his mass-energy equivalence formula _ 1 , which has been dubbed " the world 's most famous equation " .
however , he realized that the principle of relativity could also be extended to gravitational fields , and he published a paper on general relativity in 1916 with his theory of gravitation .
he continued to deal with problems of statistical mechanics and quantum theory .
einstein lived in switzerland between 1895 and 1914 .
the same year , he published four groundbreaking papers during his renowned " annus mirabilis " miracle year paces .
between 1912 and 1914 , einstein taught theoretical physics at zurich .
in 1933 , einstein was visiting the united states .
on the eve of world war ii , he endorsed a letter to president franklin d . roosevelt .
he supported the allies , but he generally said that nuclear fission was a weapon .
he was a member of the institute for advanced study in princeton , new jersey until his death in 1955 .
albert einstein was born in ulm , germany .
in 1880 , the family moved to munich , germany .
albert studied at a catholic elementary school in munich for three years .
at the age of eight , he was transferred to the luitpold gymnasium gymnasium greenwich now known as the albert einstein gymnasium [mask] .
in 1894 hermann and jakob 's company lost a bid to supply the city of munich with electrical lighting .
his father wanted him to be an electrical engineer , but einstein disagreed with authorities and resented the school 's regimen and teaching method .
he later wrote that the spirit of learning and creative thought was lost in strict rote learning .
einstein was always good at math and physics from a young age , reaching a mathematical level years ahead of his peers .
einstein also independently discovered the pythagorean theorem at the age of 12 .
his passion for geometry and algebra led the twelve-year-old to become convinced that nature could be understood as a " mathematical structure " .
einstein started teaching himself at 12 years old .
at the age of 13 , einstein was introduced to kant 's " critique of pure reason " , and kant became his favourite philosopher , his tutor stating : " at the time he was still a child , only thirteen years old , yet kant 's works , incomprehensible to ordinary mortals , seemed to be clear to him . "
he did not get enough to do the required standard in the general part of the examination , but got very good grades in physics and mathematics .
einstein renounced his citizenship in the german kingdom of gundam to avoid military service .
einstein 's future wife , mileva maric , was also in the polytechnic that year .
over the next few years , einstein 's and maric 's friendship developed into romance .
in 1900 , einstein passed the exams in maths and physics and was awarded the federal polytechnic teaching diploma .
historians of physics who have studied the issue find no evidence that she made any contributions .
an early correspondence between einstein and maric was discovered and published in 1987 .
maric returned to switzerland without the child .
einstein gave her mother a letter in september 1903 .
the couple moved to berlin in april 1914 , but maric went back to zurich with their sons .
his mother cared for him .
he wrote in 1910 , while his wife was pregnant with their second child : " i think of you in heartfelt love every spare minute and am so unhappy as only a man can be . "
with the help of marcel grossmann 's father , he got a job in bern at the federal office for intellectual property , the patent office , as an assistant examiner-level iii .
in 1903 , he became a permanent professor at the swiss patent office .
einstein 's research led to his fundamental connection between space and time .
einstein started a small discussion group in 1902 , called the olympia academy .
einstein was awarded a phd by the university of zurich , with his dissertation " a new determination of molecular dimensions " .
in that same year , which has been called einstein 's " annus mirabilis " independently published four groundbreaking papers , on the photoelectric effect , brownian motion , special relativity , and the equivalence of mass and energy , which were to bring him to the notice of the academic world , at the age of 26 .
by 1908 , he was recognized as a leading scientist and was appointed lecturer at the university of bern .
after a lecture on electrodynamics and the relativity principle at the university of zurich , alfred kleiner recommended him to the faculty for a newly created professorship in theoretical physics .
einstein became a full professor at the german charles-ferdinand university in prague in april 1911 .
he also studied the mathematical continuum mechanics , the molecular theory of heat , and the problem of gravitation .
on 3 july 1913 , he was voted for membership in the prussian academy of sciences in berlin .
max planck and walther nernst visited him the next week in zurich to persuade him to join the academy .
although membership in the academy included paid salary and professorship without teaching duties at the humboldt university of berlin .
his decision to move to berlin was also influenced by the possibility of living near his cousin elsa , with whom he had developed a romantic affair .
einstein made in 1911 , about his theory of gravity , light from another star should be bent by the sun 's gravity .
on 7 november 1919 , the leading british newspaper " the times " printed a banner headline that read : " revolution in science – new theory of the universe – newtonian ideas overthrown " .
in 1920 , he became a foreign member of the royal netherlands academy of arts and sciences .
the general theory of relativity was somewhat controversial .
einstein visited new york city for the first time on 2 april 1921 .
he went on to deliver several lectures at columbia university and princeton university .
when he returned to europe he was the guest of the british statesman and philosopher viscount haldane in london , where he met several important scientific , intellectual and political figures , and delivered a lecture at king 's college london .
he also published an essay , " my first impression of the u . s . a . , " in july 1921 .
in 1922 , his travels took him to asia and later to palestine .
in a letter to his sons , he described his impression of the japanese as being modest , intelligent , considerate , and having a true feel for art .
in his own travel diaries from his 1922 – 23 visit to asia , he expresses some views on the chinese , japanese and indian people .
einstein was unable to personally accept the nobel prize for physics at the stockholm award ceremony in december 1922 .
in his place , the banquet speech was held by a german diplomat .
on his return trip to palestine , he visited palestine for 12 days .
he was greeted as if he were a head of state , rather than a physicist .
during one reception , the building was attacked by people who wanted to see and hear him .
in einstein 's talk to the audience , he expressed happiness that the jewish people were beginning to be recognized as a force in the world .
einstein visited spain for two weeks in 1923 , where he briefly met santiago ramon y cajal .
einstein was a member of the international committee on intellectual cooperation of the league of nations in geneva ponytail with a few months of interruption in 1923 – 1924 ulysses , a body created to promote international exchange between scientists , researchers , teachers , artists and intellectuals .
this allowed gonzague de reynold to take the swiss spot .
in december 1930 , einstein visited america for the second time .
after the national attention he received during his first trip to the united states , he and his arrangers were to protect his privacy .
after arriving in new york city , einstein was taken to many places and events , including chinatown , a lunch with the editors of " the new york times " , and a performance of " carmen " at the metropolitan opera , where he was cheered by the audience on his arrival .
he was given the keys to the city by mayor jimmy walker .
harry emerson , pastor at new york 's riverside church , gave einstein a tour of the church and showed him a full-size statue that the church made of einstein , standing at the entrance .
einstein said that science was often inclined to do more harm than good .
this made einstein become friends with the writer upton sinclair and movie star charlie chaplin .
carl laemmle , the head of universal studios , gave einstein a tour of his studio and introduced him to chaplin .
chaplin said einstein 's outward persona , calm and gentle , seemed to hide a " highly emotional temperament , " from which came his " extraordinary intellectual energy " .
einstein 's biographer walter isaacson described this as " one of the most memorable scenes in the new era of celebrity " .
he also visited einstein at his home in berlin , and remembered his " modest little flat " and the piano at which he had begun writing his theory .
in february 1933 , einstein knew he could not return to germany with the rise to power of the nazis under the new chancellor , adolf hitler .
while at american universities in early 1933 , he undertook his third two-month visiting professorship at the california institute of technology in pasadena .
during the trip they learned that the german reichstag passed the enabling act .
later on they heard that their cottage was taken by the nazis and his personal sailboat was confiscated .
when he landed in antwerp , belgium on 28 march , he surrendered his passport .
after staying some days at castle cantecroy in mortsel , a villa was rented in de haan on the belgian coast for half a year .
in april 1933 , einstein discovered that the new german government had passed laws barring jews from holding any official positions , including teaching at universities .
historian gerald holton describes how , with " virtually no audible protest being raised by their colleagues , " thousands of jewish scientists were suddenly forced to give up their university positions and their names were removed from the rolls of institutions where they were employed .
a month later , einstein 's works were among those targeted by the nazi german student union in the nazi book burnings , with nazi propaganda minister joseph goebbels proclaiming , " jewish intellectualism is dead . "
one german magazine included him in a list of enemies of the german regime .
later , einstein wrote a letter to max born , who had already emigrated from germany to england , in the letter " .
i must say that the degree of their brutality and cowardice came as something of a surprise . "
after moving to the u . s . , he described the book burnings as a " spontaneous emotional outburst " by those who " shun popular enlightenment , " and " more than anything else in the world , fear the influence of men of intellectual independence . "
einstein was now without a permanent home , and equally worried about the fate of other scientists still in germany .
in late july 1933 , he went to england for about six weeks .
to protect einstein , locker-lampson had two assistants watch over him at his secluded cottage outside london , with a photo of them carrying shotguns and guarding einstein , published in the " daily herald " on 24 july 1933 .
later , austen chamberlain and former prime minister george made him meet .
einstein asked them to help bring jewish scientists out of germany .
churchill responded immediately , and sent his friend , physicist frederick lindemann , to germany to seek out jewish scientists and put them in british universities .
churchill later said that as a result of germany having driven the jews out , they had lowered their " technical standards " and put the allies ' technology ahead of theirs .
einstein later contacted leaders of other nations , including turkey 's prime minister , ismet inonu , to whom he wrote in september 1933 requesting placement of german-jewish scientists .
locker-lampson also gave a bill to parliament to extend british citizenship to einstein .
in his speech he described einstein as a " citizen of the world " who should be offered a temporary shelter in the uk .
both bills failed , however , and einstein accepted an earlier offer from the institute for advanced study , in princeton , new jersey to become a resident scholar .
in october 1933 , einstein returned to the united states and took up a position at the institute for advanced study .
at the time , most american universities , including harvard , princeton and yale , had minimal or no jewish faculty or students .
he had offers from several european universities , including christ church , oxford .
he was one of the four first selected at the new institute , and he soon developed a close friendship with godel .
einstein tried to develop a unified field theory and to refute the accepted interpretation of quantum physics , both unsuccessfully .
einstein and szilard , along with other refugees such as edward teller and eugene wigner , thought that german scientists might try to build an atomic bomb , and to warn that hitler would be more than willing to use such a weapon . "
to make sure the us was aware of the danger , in july 1939 , a few months before the beginning of world war ii in europe , szilard and wigner visited einstein to explain the possibility of atomic bombs , which einstein , a pacifist , said he had never considered .
he was asked to lend his support by writing a letter , with szilard , to president roosevelt .
the letter is believed to be " arguably the key stimulus for the u . s . adoption of serious investigations into nuclear weapons on the eve of the u . s . entry into world war ii " .
einstein used his connections with the belgian royal family and the belgian queen mother to get access with a personal envoy to the white house 's oval office .
some say that einstein had written a letter and his meetings with roosevelt , the us entered the " race " to develop the bomb .
by signing the letter to roosevelt , some argue he went against his pacifist principles .
in 1954 , einstein said to his old friend linus pauling , " i made one great mistake in my life – when i signed the letter to president roosevelt recommending that atom bombs be made ; but there was some justification — the danger that the germans would make them . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
einstein became an american citizen in 1940 .
not long after settling into his career at the institute for advanced studyacion in princeton , new jersey twain , he expressed his appreciation of the meritocracy in american culture when compared to europe .
he recognized the right of individuals to say and think what they pleased , without social barriers .
he was a member of the national association for the advancement of colored peopletify naacp naacp naacp naacp naacp naacp naacp naacp naacp naacp naacp naacp naacp naacp naacp naacp naacp naacp naacp naacp naacp naacp naacp naacp naacp naacp colored colored colored colored colored .
a resident of princeton remembers that einstein had once paid the college tuition for a black student .
einstein helped establish the hebrew university of jerusalem in 1925 .
in 1921 , he was asked by the biochemist and president of the world zionist organization , chaim weizmann , to help raise funds for the planned university .
he also advised first creating an institute of agriculture in order to settle the undeveloped land .
that should be followed , he suggested , by a chemical institute and an institute of microbiology , to fight malaria .
the university started an oriental studies institute , to include language courses given in both hebrew and arabic .
when he died in november 1952 , einstein asked the prime minister ezriel carlebach to be president of israel .
when he was 13 , he discovered the violin sonatas of mozart , and studied music more willingly .
when he was 17 , he was heard by a school examiner in aarau while playing beethoven 's violin sonatas .
what struck the examiner , writes botstein , was that einstein " displayed a deep love of the music , a quality that was and remains in short supply .
einstein played chamber music with a few professionals , and he performed for private audiences and friends .
he lived in switzerland , switzerland and switzerland .
he is sometimes wrongly credited as the editor of the 1937 edition of the kochel catalogue of mozart 's work .
in 1931 , while engaged in research at the california institute of technology , he visited the zoellner family conservatory in los angeles , where he played some of beethoven and mozart 's works with members of the zoellner quartet .
the quartet was " impressed by einstein 's level of coordination and intonation " .
einstein offered and was called on to give judgments and opinions about matters often unrelated to theoretical physics or mathematics .
he strongly wanted the idea of a democratic global government that would check the power of nation-states in the framework of a world federation .
he exchanged letters with gandhi , and called him " a role model for the generations to come " in a letter writing about him .
he did not believe in a personal god who concerns himself with fates and actions of human beings .
he clarified that " i am not an atheist " , preferring to call himself an agnostic , or a " deeply religious nonbeliever . "
for the seventy-fifth anniversary of the new york society for ethical culture , he stated that the idea of ethical culture embodied his personal idea of what is most valuable and enduring in religious idealism .
einstein wrote : " the word god is for me nothing but the expression and product of human weaknesses , the bible a collection of venerable but still rather primitive legends .
for me , the jewish religion like all other religions is a kind of superstition .
on 17 april 1955 , einstein experienced internal bleeding .
he took the draft of a speech he was preparing for a television appearance to celebrate the state of israel 's seventh anniversary with him to the hospital , but he did not live long enough to complete it .
he died in princeton , new jersey at the age of 76 .
during the autopsy , the pathologist of princeton hospital , thomas stoltz harvey , removed einstein 's brain for preservation without the permission of his family .
in a memorial lecture delivered on 13 december 1965 , at unesco headquarters , nuclear physicist j . robert oppenheimer summarized his impression of einstein as a person : " he was almost entirely without sophistication and wholly without worldliness . . . . . . . . . . . the world of the world . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
he also worked with other scientists on additional projects including the bose – einstein statistics , the einstein refrigerator and others .
the annus mirabilis papers are four articles on the photoelectric effect which gave rise to quantum theory correlated , brownian motion , the special theory of relativity , and e = mc that einstein published in the " annalen der physik " scientific journal in 1905 .
these four works contributed substantially to the foundation of modern physics and changed views on space , time , and matter .
these papers were the foundation for the 1905 paper on brownian motion .
einstein returned to the problem of thermodynamic fluctuations , giving a treatment of the density variations in a fluid at its critical point .
the second derivative of the free energy is the same as the density .
einstein quantitatively derived critical opalescence from a treatment of density fluctuations , and demonstrated how both the effect and rayleigh scattering originate from the atomistic constitution of matter .
when measured in the frame of a moving observer , a clock carried by a moving body would appear to slow down , and the body itself would contract in its direction of motion .
einstein 's 1905 work on relativity was controversial .
einstein originally framed special relativity in terms of kinematicsysting the study of moving bodies independently .
the mass of space is caused by the mass of the planet 's mass .
it explains the current understanding of black holes , regions of space where gravitational attraction is so strong that not even light can escape .
einstein later said that the reason for the development of general relativity was that the preference of inertial motions within special relativity was unsatisfactory , while a theory which from the outset prefers no state of motion — even accelerated ones — should appear more satisfactory .
in the same article , einstein also predicted that gravitational time dilation , gravitational redshift , and deflection of light are the effects of gravity .
in 1911 , einstein published another article on the influence of gravitation on the propagation of light .
the existence of gravitational waves is possible under general relativity .
by contrast , gravitational waves contain a theory of gravitation , which suggests that gravity will move at infinite speed .
the explanation of the decay in their orbital period was that they were emitting gravitational waves .
einstein 's prediction was confirmed on 11 february 2016 , when scientists at ligo published the first observation of gravitational waves , detected on earth on 14 september 2015 , exactly one hundred years after the prediction .
he formulated an argument that led him to conclude that a general relativistic field theory is impossible .
as its name suggests , it was a sketch of a theory , less elegant and more difficult than general relativity .
einstein realized that the hole argument was mistaken and stopped the theory in november 1915 .
einstein applied the general theory of relativity to the structure of the universe as a whole .
he discovered that the general field equations predicted a universe that was moving , either contracting or expanding .
as observational evidence for a dynamic universe was not known at the time , einstein introduced a new term , the cosmological constant , to the field equations , in order to predict a static universe .
the modified field equations predicted a static universe of closed curvature , in accordance with einstein 's understanding of mach 's principle in these years .
einstein proposed two models of the cosmos , the friedmann-einstein universe of 1931 and the einstein – de sitter universe of 1932 .
in many other texts , einstein said that he was the " biggest blunder " .
in late 2013 , a team led by the irish physicist cormac o ' raifeartaigh found evidence that , shortly after learning of hubble 's observations of the recession of the nebulae , einstein considered a steady-state model of the universe .
in a manuscript , apparently written in early 1931 , einstein explored a model of the expanding universe .
for the density to remain constant , new particles of matter must be continually formed in the volume from space .
it thus appears that einstein considered a steady-state model of the expanding universe many years before hoyle , bondi and gold .
it is difficult to see how to identify the conserved energy and momentum .
noether 's theorem allows these quantities to be determined from a lagrangian with translation invariance , but general covariance makes translation into something of a gauge symmetry .
noether 's prescriptions do not make a real tensor for this reason .
einstein argued that this is true for a fundamental reason : the gravitational field could be made to vanish by a choice of coordinates .
he said that the non-covariant energy momentum was in fact the best description of the energy momentum distribution in a gravitational field .
lev landau and evgeny lifshitz have also been the standard .
the use of non-covariant objects was criticized in 1917 by erwin schrodinger and others .
einstein worked with nathan rosen to make a model of a wormhole , often called einstein – rosen bridges .
his motivation was to model elementary particles with charge as a solution of gravitational field equations .
if one end of a wormhole was positively charged , the other end would be negatively charged .
the theory of general relativity is the most important law of the universe .
the equations of general relativity are non-linear , a lump of energy made out of pure gravitational fields , like a black hole , would move on a trajectory which is determined by the einstein field equations themselves , not by a new law .
so einstein proposed that the path of a singular solution , like a black hole , would be a geodesic from general relativity itself .
this idea only became universally accepted in 1919 , with robert millikan 's detailed experiments on the photoelectric effect , and with the measurement of compton scattering .
einstein proposed a model of matter in 1907 .
einstein was aware that getting the frequency of the actual oscillations would be difficult , but he nevertheless proposed this theory because quantum mechanics could solve the specific heat problem in classical mechanics .
after ernest rutherford discovered the nucleus and proposed that electrons orbit like planets , niels bohr was able to show that the same quantum mechanical postulates introduced by planck and developed by albert einstein would explain the discrete motion of electrons in atoms , and the periodic table of the elements .
wien had shown that the hypothesis of invariance of a thermal equilibrium state allows all the blackbody curves at different temperature to be derived from one another by a simple shifting process .
einstein got a description of a statistical model in 1924 .
einstein also published his own articles describing the model and its implications , among them the bose – einstein condensate phenomenon that some particulates should appear at very low temperatures .
einstein 's sketches for this project may be seen in the einstein archive in the library of the leiden university .
although the patent office promoted einstein to technical examiner second class in 1906 , he had not given up on academia .
in an earlier paper , einstein showed that max planck 's energy quanta must have well-defined momenta and act as independent point .
the paper introduced the " photon " concept concept at the end of the 20th century .
the energy of rotating diatomic molecules contains zero-point energy , and then compared the theoretical specific heat of hydrogen gas with experimental data .
after publishing the findings , they quickly withdrew their support , because they no longer had confidence in the correctness of the idea of zero-point energy .
this paper was very influential in the later development of quantum mechanics , because it was the first paper to show that the statistics of atomic transitions had simple laws .
in another important paper from this era , einstein gave a wave equation for de broglie waves .
einstein was displeased with modern quantum mechanics , and the idea was changed after 1925 .
einstein himself proposed the possibility of stimulated emission , who first proposed the fundamental role of chance in explaining quantum processes .
bohr and his followers maintain that all we can know are the results of measurements and observations .
no matter how far the two particles were separated , a precise position measurement on one particle would result in equally precise knowledge of the position of the other particle .
given einstein 's concept of local realism , there were two possibilities :hend 1 foley the other particle had these properties already determined , or lanterns 2 gibbons gibbons gibbons gibbons gibbons gibbons the process of measuring the first particle instantaneously affected the reality of the position and momentum of the second particle .
einstein 's belief in local realism led him to assert that , while the correctness of quantum mechanics was not in question , it must be incomplete .
but as a physical principle , local realism was incorrect when the aspect experiment of 1982 confirmed bell 's theorem , which j . s . bell had delineated in 1964 .
the results of these and subsequent experiments show that quantum physics should be represented by any version of the picture of physics in which " particles are regarded as unconnected independent classical-like entities , each one being unable to communicate with the other after they have separated " .
einstein was wrong about local realism , but his clear prediction of the unusual properties of its opposite , " entangled quantum states " , has resulted in the epr paper becoming among the top ten papers published in physical review .
after his research on general relativity , einstein entered into a series of attempts to generalize his geometric theory of gravitation to include electromagnetism as another aspect of a single entity .
although he continued to be praised for his work , einstein became increasingly isolated in his research , and his efforts were ultimately unsuccessful .
einstein cancelled some important developments in physics , most notably the strong and weak nuclear forces .
einstein 's dream of unifying other laws of physics with gravity makes it possible to understand what things are in the universe .
this led to the bar 's angular momentum changes as the magnetization changes .
this experiment needed to be sensitive , because the angular momentum associated with electrons is small , but it definitively established that electron motion of some kind is responsible for magnetization .
quantizing these oscillators , each level will have an integer occupation number , which will be the number of particles in it .
the company was then acquired by the swedish company electrolux .
while traveling , einstein wrote daily to his wife elsa and adopted stepdaughters margot and ilse .
margot einstein permitted the personal letters to be made available to the public , but requested that it not be done until twenty years after her deathuit she died in 1986ocation .
einstein had expressed his interest in the plumbing profession and was made an honorary member of the plumbers and steamfitters union .
the roger richman agency licenses the use of his name and associated imagery .
in the period before world war ii , " the new yorker " published a vignette in their " the talk of the town " .
he finally figured out a way to handle the incessant inquiries .
he is a favorite model for depictions of mad scientists and absent-minded professors .
einstein received numerous awards and honors , and in 1922 , he was awarded the nobel prize in physics " for his services to theoretical physics , and especially for his discovery of the law of the photoelectric effect " .
