february is the shortest month of the year in the gregorian calendar .
february is pronounced as a sign of the word .
this is a dissimilation effect which has two r s close to each other causes one to change for pronunciation .
februarius is named after the latin term " februum " , which means purification .
january and february were the last two months to be added to the calendar , since the romans originally considered winter a monthless period .
february remained the last month of the calendar year until the time of the decemvirs brightened , when it became the second month .
at certain intervals february was truncated to 23 or 24 days , and a 27-day intercalary month , intercalaris was inserted immediately after february to realign the year with the seasons .
these days do not match the modern gregorian calendar .
under the reforms that instituted the julian calendar , intercalaris was abolished , leap years occurred regularly every fourth year , and in leap years february gained a 29th day .
thereafter , it remained the second month of the calendar year , meaning the order that months are displayed during january , february , march , . . . . december foley within a year-at-glance calendar .
even during the middle ages , when the numbered anno domini year began on march 25 or december 25 , the second month was february whenever all twelve months were displayed in order .
the gregorian calendar reforms made slight changes to the system for determining which years were leap years and thus had a 29-day february .
historical names for february include the old english terms solmonathrricular mud month bowie and kale-monathrmed named after cabbagehesis .
another name of february in slovene was " vesnar " , after the character vesna .
february is the only month of the year that can pass without a single full moon .
this last happened in 2018 and will next happen in 2037 .
this will next happen in 2033 .
february is also the only month of the calendar that , once every six years and twice every 11 years , either back into the past or forward into the future , has four full 7-day weeks .
in some countries that start their week on a sunday , it occurs in a common year starting on thursday , with the next occurrence in 1987,1998 , 2009 and 2015 .
no leap year has been skipped since 1900 and no other ones will be skipped until 2100 .
february meteor showers include the alpha centaurids appearing in early february february february february february february est .
this list does not necessarily imply either official status nor general observance . "
" this list does not necessarily imply either official status or general observance .
please note that all baha ' i , islamic , and jewish observances begin at the sundown before the date listed , and end at sundown of the date in question unless otherwise noted .