february is the shortest month of the year in the gregorian calendar .
it is the first of five months to have a length of less than 31 days .
in 2019 , february 28 days after the first trip to the united states .
february is the third month of winter in the northern hemisphere .
in the southern hemisphere , it is the seasonal equivalent of august in the northern hemisphere .
february is pronounced as a sign of the word .
many people drop the first r , replacing it with , as if it were spelled febuary .
this is a dissimilation effect which has two r s close to each other causes one to change for pronunciation .
februarius is named after the latin term " februum " , which means purification .
january and february were the last two months to be added to the calendar , since the romans originally considered winter a monthless period .
they were added by numa pompilius about 713 bc .
february remained the last month of the calendar year until the time of the decemvirs brightened , when it became the second month .
at certain intervals february was truncated to 23 or 24 days , and a 27-day intercalary month , intercalaris was inserted immediately after february to realign the year with the seasons .
february observances in ancient rome include amburbiumiumiumiumiumiumiumium jemivae zoological date unknown brightness brightness brightness brightness brightness brightness brightness brightness brightness brightness brightness brightness brightness brightness brightness brightness brightness brightness brightness brightness brightness brightness brightness brightness brightness brightness brightness brightness brightness brightness brightness brightness .
these days do not match the modern gregorian calendar .
under the reforms that instituted the julian calendar , intercalaris was abolished , leap years occurred regularly every fourth year , and in leap years february gained a 29th day .
thereafter , it remained the second month of the calendar year , meaning the order that months are displayed during january , february , march , . . . . december foley within a year-at-glance calendar .
even during the middle ages , when the numbered anno domini year began on march 25 or december 25 , the second month was february whenever all twelve months were displayed in order .
the gregorian calendar reforms made slight changes to the system for determining which years were leap years and thus had a 29-day february .
historical names for february include the old english terms solmonathrricular mud month bowie and kale-monathrmed named after cabbagehesis .
in finnish , the month is called " helmiku " , meaning " month of the pearl " .
in polish and ukrainian , the month is called luty or лютии , meaning the month of ice or hard frost .
in macedonian the month is " sechko " ; сечкоnstivec , meaning month of cutting wood .
in czech , it is called " unor " , meaning " submerging of river ice " .
in slovene , february is traditionally called " svecan " .
the name " svican " was first used in the " new carniolan almanac " in 1775 .
the name was also spelled " secan " , meaning " the month of cutting down trees " .
in 1848 , a proposal was put forward in " kmetijske in rokodelske novice " by the slovene society of ljubljana to call this month " talnik " according to ice melting coulter , but it did not stick .
the idea was proposed by a priest , blaz potocnik .
another name of february in slovene was " vesnar " , after the character vesna .
february is the only month of the year that can pass without a single full moon .
this last happened in 2018 and will next happen in 2037 .
this will next happen in 2033 .
february is also the only month of the calendar that , once every six years and twice every 11 years , either back into the past or forward into the future , has four full 7-day weeks .
in countries that start their week on a monday , it occurs as part of a common year starting on friday .
in some countries that start their week on a sunday , it occurs in a common year starting on thursday , with the next occurrence in 1987,1998 , 2009 and 2015 .
no leap year has been skipped since 1900 and no other ones will be skipped until 2100 .
february meteor showers include the alpha centaurids appearing in early february february february february february february est .
the western zodiac signs of february are aquarius lantern .
" this list does not necessarily imply either official status nor general observance . "
" this list does not necessarily imply either official status or general observance .
please note that all baha ' i , islamic , and jewish observances begin at the sundown before the date listed , and end at sundown of the date in question unless otherwise noted .
first friday : february 1 : february 1 first sunday : february 3 first monday : february 3 first monday , february 3 first monday , february 4 first monday , february 3rd week of february firstly first monday , ending on sunday evening evening evening evening saturday , february 4-10 : 11 second monday february 11 : second monday february 11 second monday , february 13 : second monday february 11 : second monday february february 12 , tanchachachachachachachachachachachachachachachachachachachachachachachachachachachachachachachachachachachachachachachachachachachachachachative eastern christianity .
the last friday is february 18-21 third thursday : february 22 , february 22 , last friday , february 22 , february 22,2nd monday , february 22 , last friday , february 22 , last friday : february 22 , february 22 , last friday : 23 february february february 23 , last friday : 23 february february 22 , before easter wednesday : ash wednesday , february 28 , before february 26 , ash wednesday , february 26 , before february 28 , ash wednesday , february 26 , before easter tuesday , february 28 , christianity : ash wednesday wednesday , before february 26 , february 28 , ash wednesday , february 28 , before easter tuesday , february 26 , before february 28 , ash wednesday , february 28 , before easter tuesday tuesday , february 26 , christianity : 27 , before easter wednesday , february 28 , before february 28 , february 28 , ash wednesday , before easter tuesday , february 28 , before february 26 , christianity : 27 , the last sunday day day day day day day day day day day day day day day day
