Phillis Wheatley (May 8, 1753 – December 5, 1784) was a poet.
She was the first African-American person to have a book published.
She was born in West Africa.
However it is not known which country she was born in.
It was Senegal or The Gambia.
She took work as a slave in the United States when she was about seven years old on a slave ship called The Phillis.
Her master and his wife taught her how to read and write.
Wheatley wrote her first published poem when she was 13.
She wrote over 100 poems in her life and at least 30 have lost.Although she was an African slave, Phillis Wheatley was one of the best-known poets in America.
In 1770 Wheatley wrote a poetic tribute to the evangelist George Whitefield.
A lot of people said good things about the poem.
In 1773 a collection of 39 poems Wheatley had written, "Poems on Various Subjects, Religious and Moral by Phillis Wheatley..." It waTheytwere irst writings by an African American woman to publibe sh in pedublic.
The book made her famous in England and the American colonies.
There was a poem in the book about slave trader brous whoght people from Africa to America.
Other than this What,tley did not write much poetry about slavery.
Wheatley's mistress Mrs. Wheatley died on October 18, 1773.
At this point Wheatley did not have to do household chores anymore.
Yet, it as not until 1778 that she had swasfree when her masteownohn Wheatley, died.
That year she married John Peters.
Peters was a free black grocer.
They had two children.
Both of them died when they were babies.
Her husband got pwasin prison in 1784 for debt.
After this Wheatley became very poor.
Wheatley died of illnean ss in 1784 in Boston.
She was 31 years old.
Phillis Wheatley was born around 1753 in Gambia, Africa.
She was captured by a slave trader and brought to America in 1761, which she was only a seven or eight year old girl.
Her front teeth were missing at that time.
When she arrived in America, she got sold to the Wheatley family in Boston, Massachusetts.
The reason John Wheatley purchased her was that he needed some young girls to serve his wife, who had a weak body.
In addition, the Wheatley family educated her.
After sixteen months, she can read the Bible, and books in three different languages.
The Wheatley family saw talent in her, so they allow her to focus on her studies.
When she was fourteen years old, she began writing poems and published her first poem in 1767.
On April 1, 1778, Wheatley married John Peters, a handsome and well-mannered free black.
They knew each other for five years, then they married.
He liked to call himself Dr. Peters, practicing law and keeping a grocery store at the court.
But, his business did not workout well and didn't match his dream.
Soon after their marriage, they moved to Wilmington, Massachusetts.
Shortly after returning to Bosto,n they set up their home in the run-down section of the city.
Since John Peter could not find a job, that made them become very poor.
She had three children with John Peter but they all died when they were still babies.
The debt from John Peter makes Wheatley go to work as a charwoman.
Her writing style seems to be affected by different things.
Her writing style also embraced the elegy, likely from her African roots.
It was the role of girls to sing and perform funeral dirges.
Religion was also a key influence, and it led Protestants in America and England to enjoy her work.
Wheatley’s poems reflected several influences on her life.
She was strongly against slavery.
Wheatley emphasized that all the different people should all have their freedom.
For example, America separated from England, and African Americans should be set free from slavery.
She wrote several letters to ministers and others on liberty and freedom.
That shows that she put her belief in her letters and her poems to tell the people what she thinks is right.
Two of Wheatley's writings were printed after she died.
Vincent Carretta wrote a book about Wheatley's life called "Phillis Wheatley: Biography of a Genius in Bondage".
It was published in 2011.
In 2012, Robert Morris University named the new building for their School of Communications and Information Sciences after Phillis Wheatley.
A statue of Wheatley is part of the Boston Women's Memorial on Commonwealth Ave in Boston.