the full season was released on dvd on october 5,2010 .
the sixteen tribes were split into two tribes , samburu and boran , and were given camps that included pre-constructed fencing to protect them from wildlife .
samburu took an early lead , but the tribe internally was divided along age linesisches silas , kim p . , brandon and lindsey as one , and frank , teresa , carl and linda as the other .
at their first tribal council , the age blocs left a stalemate tie between carl and lindsey , and with no previous votes to count , a quiz was used , with lindsay winning and putting the younger members in control ; on the next visit to tribal council , linda was eliminated , and both tribes were even at six .
on day 13 , the tribes were given a vague clue about sending three members on quest , unaware this would be the first tribal swap for " survivor " .
silas picked along with the two remaining samburu , frank and teresa , while kelly , big tom and lex were picked for boran .
after informed of the tribal swap , these players joined their new tribe .
the samburu members worked to create internal strife within the boran faction .
first , they convincing them to eliminate clarence as a physical challenge threat , and then by angering lex as to incorrectly accuse of kelly of attempting to vote him off .
the final four were ethan , lex , big tom , and kim j . kim won the last two immunity challenges ; tom was voted off due to previous schemes to past future schemes to vote against lex 's group .
then , lex was voted out by kim 's solitary vote , as she felt that she would not have a chance at the final tribal council against either lex or ethan , but felt closer to ethan .
at the final tribal council , kim j . was praised for surviving the game for her age , but accused of riding the coattails of lex , ethan and big tom .
dalton ross of " entertainment weekly " said it was the eighth-worst season of the series .
tom santilli of examiner . com ranked it # 26 , saying that following " borneo " and " australian outback " , " it was a complete dud at the time , " while also noting that interesting , " and that the cast 's " lethargy showed on screen " showed the place because of the poor conditions in the filming .
it was also ranked 24th by fan site " the purple rock podcast , " which said that " this season suffers because of its location , " and that " the cast on this season is generally pretty decent , and probably would have been much better if they crotched of energy by lack of food and water " .
rob cesternino ranked the season 26th out of the first 30 .
the season was ranked as the fifth worst by andrea deiher of zap2it in 2013 , before it was replaced by " in 2015 .
in a " fallen comrades " challenge , in which the players were quizzed on questions about players in the game who had been voted out , the final question was " which female contestant has no piercings ? "
the official answer was kelly .
lex lex later answered the question with lindsey 's name , who also had no piercings .
had lex been given credit for his correct answer , he and kim j . would have been tied in the challenge and would have faced tie-breaker questions .
