midgardshire is the name for the goddess of earth , which is inhabited by humans in early norse mythology .
the name occurs in old norse literature .
in old saxon " heliand " it appears as and in old high german poem " muspilli " it appears as .
the gothic form is described in the gospel of luke as a translation of the greek word .
the word is present in old english epic and poetry as ; later transformed to or kiran " middle-earth " translate in middle english literature .
all these forms are from a common germanic " * midja-gardaz " foley " * meddila-" , " * medjan-" , a compound of " middle " and " * gardaz " yard , enclosure " .
in early germanic cosmology , the term stands alongside " world " — old old english " werold " , old high german " weralt " , old frisian " warld " and old norse " verold " , from a common germanic compound " wira-alđiz " , the age of men .
midgard is a realm in norse mythology .
it is one of the nine worlds that is completely visible to mankind .
midgard is between the land of ice – the land of ice – to the north and muspelheim — the land of fire — to the south .
midgard is surrounded by a world of water or ocean .
the ocean is inhabited by the great sea serpent jormungandrvius .
the concept is similar to that of ouroboros .
midgard was connected to asgard by the bifrost , the rainbow bridge , guarded by heimdallr .
in norse mythology , " miðgarðr " became applied to the wall around the world .
the gods slew the giant ymir , the first created being , and put his body into the central void of the universe , creating the world out of his body : his flesh constituting the land , his blood the oceans , his bones the mountains , his teeth the cliffs , his hairs the trees , and his brains the clouds .
aurgelmir 's skull was held by four dwarfs , nordri , sudri , austri , and vestri , who represent the four points on the compass and became the dome of heaven .
the sun , moon , and stars were said to be scattered sparks in the skull .
according to the eddas , midgard will be destroyed at ragnarok , the battle at the end of the world .
he poisons the land and sea .
midgard and almost all life on it will be destroyed , with the earth sinking into the sea .
the danish form is the form of the scandinavian language .
middangeard is the same word as midgard in old norse .
the term is equivalent in meaning to the greek term oikoumene , as referring to the known and inhabited world .
midgard is used in middle english .
the association with " earth " denmark denmark denmark denmark uses " middellærd " , " middelerde " , " middelerde " , " enclosure " , and " geard " .
middle-earth was invented by j . r . r . tolkien in his book " the lord of the rings " .
