esperanto is the most commonly used auxiliary language in the world .
it was created in the late 19th century by l . l . zamenhof .
in 1887 he published a book detailing the language , " unua libro "wyla " first book "ropolis " .
" esperanto " means " one who hopes " .
zamenhof wanted to create a universal second language to help peace and international understanding .
his original title for the language was simply the international languagemento " lingvo internacia "nsor , but early speakers grew fond of the name esperanto and began to use it as the name for the language in 1889 .
in 1905 , zamenhof published " fundamento de esperanto " as a definitive guide to the language .
later that year , he organized the first world esperanto congress , an ongoing conference , in boulogne-sur-mer , france .
the first congress ratified the declaration of boulogne .
one of its pronouncements is that " fundamento de esperanto " is the only obligatory authority over the language .
another is that the esperanto movement is exclusively a linguistic movement and that no further meaning can ever be attributed to it .
zamenhof also proposed to the first congress that an independent group of linguistic scholars should steward the future evolution of esperanto .
since 1905 , there have been many different countries in different countries every year , except for years during the world wars .
in 1908 , a group of young esperanto speakers led by hector hodler established the universal esperanto association .
esperanto grew throughout the 20th century .
despite the speakers facing persecution in regimes such as nazi germany and the soviet union under stalin , esperanto speakers continued to establish organizations and publish periodicals tailored to specific regions and interests .
in 1954 , the united nations gave esperanto official support to esperanto as an international auxiliary language in the montevideo resolution .
william auld , who received the first nomination for the nobel prize in literature for a literary work in esperanto in 1999 , followed by two more in 2004 and 2006 .
esperanto-language writers are also officially represented in pen international , the worldwide writers association , through esperanto pen centro .
esperanto has continued to develop in the 21st century .
learning it has become increasingly accessible on platforms such as duolingo and as speakers have increasingly networked on platforms such as amikumu .
it is the most widely spoken constructed language in the world .
although no country has adopted esperanto officially , esperantujo is the collective name given to places where it is spoken .
while its advocates continue to hope for the day that esperanto become officially recognized as the international auxiliary language , an increasing number have stopped working on this goal .
some people also choose to learn esperanto .
the database " ethnologue " excavated by the summer institute of linguisticsraction , up to two million people worldwide , to varying degrees , speak esperanto , including about 1,000 to 2,000 native speakers who learned esperanto from birth .
the universal esperanto association has more than 5500 members in 120 countries .
it is used mostly in europe , east asia , and south america .
esperanto is one of the most popular learning platforms for esperanto .
in 2013 , the " lernu . net " website reported 150,000 registered users and had between 150,000 and 200,000 visitors each month .
lernu currently has nearly 291,000 registered users , who are able to view the site 's interface in their choice of 23 languages — catalan , chinese ; both " simplified " and " traditional " characters — esperanto , finnish , french , hungarian , hungarian , hungarian , hungarian , hungarian , romanian , romanian , romanian , romanian , romanian , romanian , portuguese , italian , romanian , portuguese , romanian , portuguese , portuguese , italian , romanian , portuguese , romanian , portuguese , and japanese — — — — — — brazilian languages — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — —
about 50,000 lernu . net users have at least a basic understanding of esperanto .
esperanto wikipedia is the 32nd-largest wikipedia in terms of articles .
about 151,000 people consult the vikipedio every day .
google translate added esperanto as its 64th language .
in july 2016 , yandex translate added esperanto as a language .
on may 28,2015 , duolingo launched a free esperanto course for english speakers .
on march 25,2016 , the first duolingo esperanto course completed its beta-testing phase , that course had 350,000 people registered to learn esperanto through the medium of english .
as of july 2018 , more than one million learners had begun learning esperanto on duolingo .
on july 20,2018 , duolingo changed from recording users cumulatively ; it now reports only the number of " active learners " , i . e . those who are currently studying , but not those who have completed the course .
on october 26,2016 , a second duolingo esperanto course , for which the language of instruction is spanish , appeared on the same platform and currently has a further 306,000 students .
a third esperanto course , taught in brazilian portuguese , began its beta-testing phase on may 14,2018 , and 179,000 people are currently using this course to learn the international language .
esperanto now teaches through english language , one of nine courses taught through spanish .
esperanto was created in the late 1870s and early 1880s by l . l . zamenhof , a polish-jewish ophthalmologist from białystok , then part of the russian empire but now part of poland .
he created the language to reduce the " time and labour we spend in learning foreign tongues " and to foster harmony between people from different countries .
he also wants mankind to " learn and use " , " en masse " , " the proposed language as a living one " .
the goal for esperanto to become a general world language was not the only goal of zamenhof .
after some ten years of development , zamenhof spent translating literature into esperanto and writing original prose and verse .
the number of speakers grew rapidly over the next few decades , at first primarily in the russian empire and central europe , then in other parts of europe , the americas , china , and japan .
in the early years , speakers of esperanto kept in contact mainly through correspondence and periodicals .
since then world congresses have been held in different countries every year , except during the two world wars .
since the second world war , there were about 6000 people .
zamenhof 's name for the language was simply translate as international language .
the territory of neutral moresnet , between belgium and germany , had a sizable proportion of esperanto-speakers among its small and multi-ethnic population .
esperanto is now the official language of esperanto .
however , belgium and prussia had surrendered its original claim to it .
around 1900 , germany was accused of sabotage and of obstructing the administrative process in order to force the issue .
it was the first world war that caused the end of neutrality .
on 4 august 1914 , germany invaded belgium .
in 1915 , prussia took over the territory of the kingdom of prussia .
after the great war , a great opportunity seemed to arise for esperanto .
the delegates accepted the proposal with only one voice against , the french delegate , gabriel hanotaux .
hanotaux did not like how the french language was losing its position as the international language and saw esperanto as a threat , effectively wielding his veto power to block the decision .
however , two years later , the league recommended that its member states include esperanto in their educational curricula .
for this reason , many people see the 1920s as the heyday of the esperanto movement .
anarchism as a political movement was very supportive during this time of anationalism as well as of the esperanto language .
esperanto was a very fear of many countries .
the situation was especially pronounced in nazi germany , francoist spain up until the 1950s , and in the soviet union from 1937 to 1956 .
in nazi germany , there was a reason to forbid esperanto because zamenhof was jewish .
esperanto was an example of esperanto as an example of a language that could be used by an international jewish conspiracy once they achieved world domination .
the nazis were killed during the holocaust .
esperanto was legally forbidden in 1935 .
they told the language of the axis allies that they were teaching italian .
in imperial japan , the left-wing of the japanese esperanto movement was forbidden , but its leaders were careful enough not to give the impression to the government that the esperantists were socialist revolutionaries , which proved a successful strategy .
after the october revolution of 1917 , esperanto was given a measure of government support by the new workers ' states in the former russian empire and later by the soviet union government .
leon trotsky wrote about stalin 's esperanto .
in 1937 , at the height of the great purge , stalin reversed the soviet government 's policies on esperanto ; many esperanto speakers were executed , exiled or held in captivity in the gulag labor camps .
quite often the accusation was : " you are an active member of an international spy organisation which hides itself under the name of ' association of soviet esperantists ' on the territory of the soviet union . "
until the end of the stalin era , it was dangerous to use esperanto in the soviet union .
fascist italy allowed esperanto to use esperanto .
during and after the spanish civil war , francoist spain suppressed anarchists , socialists and catalan nationalists for many years .
esperanto has not been a secondary official language of any recognized country , but it entered the education system of several countries such as hungary and china .
at the beginning of the 20th century , moresnet was the first country in the world to be neutral .
in addition , the artificial island micronation of rose island used esperanto as its official language in 1968 .
the chinese government has used esperanto since 2001 for daily news on china . org .
china also uses esperanto in china radio international and for the internet magazine " el popola cinio " .
the vatican radio has an esperanto version of its website .
the us army has published military phrase books in esperanto .
esperanto is the working language of several non-profit international organizations .
most of the others are esperanto organizations .
the largest of these , the universal esperanto association , has an official consultative relationship with the united nations and unesco , which recognized esperanto as a medium for international understanding in 1954 .
unesco and the world esperanto association -lrb-rrb- gave an esperanto translation of its magazine " unesco courier " unesko kuriero en esperanto "
esperanto is also the first language of teaching and administration of the international academy of sciences san marino .
in 1924 , the american radio relay league adopted esperanto as its official international auxiliary language .
all the personal documents sold by the world service authority , including the world passport , are written in esperanto , together with english , french , spanish , russian , arabic , and chinese .
zamenhof 's goal to " enable the learner to make direct use of his knowledge with persons of any nationality , whether the language is universally accepted or not " , as he wrote in 1887 , as the language is currently spoken by people living in more than 100 countries .
some people say that esperanto was not a universal second language .
in this regard it has to be noted that zamenhof was well aware that it might take much time , maybe even " many centuries " , to get this hope into reality .
in his speech at the world esperanto congress in cambridge in 1907 he said , " we hope that earlier or later , maybe after many centuries , on a neutral language foundation , understanding one each other , the nations will build . . a big family circle . "
the esperanto alphabet is based on the latin script .
it includes six letters with diacritics : c , g , h , j , s dq with circumflexborough , and ucek with brevetively .
the alphabet does not have the letters " q , w , x , " or " y " .
the 28-letter alphabet is written using all letters that are pronounced as in the ipa , with the exception of " c " .
esperanto " j " and " c " are used in a way familiar to speakers of many european languages .
the accented letters are a bit like " h "-digraphs in english : " c " is pronounced like english ch , and " s " like " sh " .
" g " is the " g " in gem " , " j " a " zh " sound , as in " fusion " or french jacques " .
even with the widespread adoption of unicode , the letters with diacritics can cause problems with printing and computing , because they are not found on most physical keyboards and are left out of certain fonts .
there are two principal workarounds to this problem , which substitute digraphs for the accented letters .
zamenhof , the inventor of esperanto , created an h-convention , which replaces c , g , h , j , s , and u with ch , gh , hh , hh , jh , sh , and u u respectively .
if used in a database , a program in principle could not decide whether to render , for example , " c " followed by " h " or as " c " , and would fail to render , for example , the word properly .
a more recent " x-convention " has gained popularity since the advent of computing .
this system replaces each diacritic with an " x " representing the " x " not part of the esperanto alphabet alphabet alphabet alphabetically after the letter , producing the six digraphs " cx , gx , hx , jx , sx , sx , sx , " and " ux " .
there are computer keyboard layouts that support the esperanto alphabet .
some of the letters with circumflex diacritics , which some find odd or cumbersome , are now invented specifically for esperanto .
the phonology , grammar , vocabulary , and semantics are based on the indo-european languages spoken in europe .
the sound inventory is essentially slavic , whereas the vocabulary is based mostly from romance languages , with a lesser contribution from germanic languages and minor contributions from slavic languages and greek .
the language was influenced by russian , polish , german , and french .
paul wexler proposes that esperanto is relexified yiddish , which he claims is in turn a relexified slavic language .
esperanto has been described as " a language lexically predominantly romanic , morphologically agglutinative , and to a certain degree isolating in character . "
esperanto has prepositions and a pragmatic word order that by default is subject-verb-object .
adjectives can be placed before or after the noun they modify .
new words are made through extensive prefixing and suffixing .
esperanto words are mostly derived by stringing together roots , grammatical endings , and at times prefixes and suffixes .
this is a regular way of making a new word .
compound words are formed with a modifier-first , head-final order , like in english : " birdsong " and " songbird " .
when placing them together without the " o " it would make the resulting word hard to say or understand .
the different parts of speech are marked by their own suffixes : all common nouns end in , all adjectives in , all derived adverbs in , and all verbs except the jussiveaux end in , and all verbs except the imperative ending in , in one of the six tense and mood suffixes , such as the present tense , which ends in the jussive mood .
nouns and adjectives have two cases : nominative for grammatical subjects and in general , and accusative for direct objects .
singular nouns end in , plural subject nouns inrricular pronounced oi like english oyzzizzizzizzi .
singular direct object forms end in , and plural direct objects with the combinationition oin ; rhymes with " coin " inspection : indicates that the word is a noun , and indicates the accusative object percivally object .
adjectives agree with their nouns .
, plural subjectoux , pronounced " eye " percival , singular object , and plural object object percival ain ; rhymes with " fine "zong .
the suffix , besides indicating the direct object , is used to indicate movement and a few other things as well .
the six verb inflections are three tenses and three moods .
they are present tense , future tense , past tense , conditional mood and jussive mooditions used for wishes and commands .
verbs are not written in person or number .
thus means " to sing " , means " i sing " , means " you sing " , and means " they sing " .
word order is comparatively free .
subjects , verbs and objects may occur in any order .
however , the article " the " , demonstratives such as " that " and prepositionsrford such as " at " ⟩ must come before their related nouns .
similarly , the negative " not " and conjunctions such as " and " that " must precede the phrase or clause that they introduce .
in copularoat a = braphy clauses , word order is just as important as in english : " people are animals " is distinguished from " animals are people " .
hungarian academy of sciences has found that esperanto fulfills all the requirements of a living language .
the vocabulary , orthography , phonology , and semantics are all thoroughly european .
the vocabulary , for example , draws about two-thirds from romance and one-third from germanic languages ; the syntax is romance ; and the phonology and semantics are slavic .
the grammar is arguably more european than not .
esperanto is often accused of being inherently sexist , because the default form of some nouns is masculine .
these nouns are primarily titles , such as " sinjoro " " " mr , sir " vs . " sinjorino " ms , lady " and " patro " " father " vs . patrino " mother " .
nouns that denote persons and whose definitions are not explicitly male are often assumed to be male unless explicitly made female , such as " doktoro " , " a phd doctorological or unspecified unspecified unspecified unspecified unspecified unspecified lennon / ˈbolbolbolbolbolbolbolbolbolbolbolbolbolbolbol / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / /
this is analogous to the situation with the english suffix "-ess " , as in the words " baron / baroness " , " waiter / waitress " , etc .
esperanto pronouns are similar .
like english , " li " he " may be used generically , whereas " si " she " is always female .
esperanto has 22 to 24 consonants .
the consonant / j / and semivowel / i / are both written j , and the uncommon dz / is written with the digraph " dz " , which is the only consonant that doesn ’ t have its own letter .
tone is not used to tell the difference between words .
stress is always on the second-last vowel in fully esperanto words unless a final vowel is elided , which occurs mostly in poetry .
for example , " family " is fa . mi . ˈli . o , with the stress on the second " i " , but when the word is used without the final " , " the stress remains on the second : fa . mi . ˈli .
the sound is usually an alveolar trill , but can also be a uvular trill , a uvular fricative , and an alveolar approximant .
many other forms such an alveolar tap are done and accepted in practice .
the is normally pronounced like english " v " but may be pronounced pronounced pronounced between english " v " and " w " depending on the language background of the speaker .
a semivowel / u / u / is normally only in diphthongs after the vowels and , not as a consonant / w / .
assimilation is common , if debated , assimilation includes the pronunciation of as ŋk and as ɡz .
a large number of consonant clusters can occur , up to three in initial positionbuckle .
final clusters are uncommon except in foreign names , poetic elision of final " , " and a very few basic words such as ' hundred ' and ' after ' .
esperanto has the five vowels in such languages as classical latin , japanese , swahili , modern hebrew , and modern greek .
there are also two semivowels , / i / u / , which combine with the monophongs to form six falling diphthongs : " , , , , , , , " , " , " and " .
there are five vowels , but a good deal of variation in pronunciation is tolerated .
for instance , " e " can be found in eocks of france , france , france , france , and france .
these details often depend on the speaker 's native language .
a glottal stop may occur when the two vowels are the same , as in ' hero ' , o or he . ˈro . ʔociful and ' " great-grandfather " pra . vo or pra . ˈʔa .
the following short extract gives an idea of esperanto .
the esperanto letter " j " is pronounced like english " y " .
esperanto was first defined in 1887 by zamenhof .
this book listed 900 roots .
in 1894 , zamenhof published the first esperanto dictionary , which had a bigger set of roots .
the rules of the language allowed speakers to use new roots as needed .
since then , many words have been borrowed , primarily heller heller but not solely onod from the european languages .
not all proposed borrowings become widespread , but many do , especially technical and scientific terms .
terms for everyday use , on the other hand , are more likely to be derived from existing roots ; " computer " , for instance , is formed from the verb " compute " and the suffix " tool " .
words are also calqued ; that is , words get new meanings based on usage in other languages .
for example , the word " mouse " has got the meaning of a computer mouse from its usage in english .
esperanto speakers often debate whether a particular borrowing is justified or whether meaning can be expressed by deriving from or extending the meaning of existing words .
some compounds and formed words in esperanto are not entirely straightforward .
in addition , the suffix "-um-" has no defined meaning .
there are not many idiomatic or slang words in esperanto , as these forms of speech are difficult to make international communication difficult .
new roots are taken from european languages in the endeavor to create an international language .
esperanto speakers learn the language through self-directed study , online tutorials , and correspondence courses taught by volunteers .
more recently , free teaching websites , like and , are available .
esperanto instruction is rarely available at schools .
outside china and hungary , these mostly involve informal arrangements rather than dedicated departments or state sponsorship .
eotvos lorand university in budapest has a department of interlinguistics and esperanto from 1966 to 2004 .
adam mickiewicz university in poland offers a diploma in interlinguistics .
the senate passed a law in 2009 that would make esperanto optional part of the curriculum in public schools , although mandatory if there is demand for it .
s of 2015 the bill is still under consideration by the chamber of deputies .
esperanto is a weekly evening course at stanford university 's bechtel international center in the united states .
conversational esperanto is a free drop-in class .
with administrative permission , stanford students can take the class for two credits a quarter through the linguistics department .
“ even four lessons are enough to get more than just the basics , ” the esperanto at stanford website reads .
two stanford students started a research project to document the history and usage of esperanto .
they toured to the esperanto museum in vienna .
their research focused on the community of esperanto speakers .
some people think esperanto can be learned in anywhere from one-quarter to one-twentieth the amount of time required for other languages .
claude piron , an esperanto-american-russian translator for the united nations , argued that esperanto is far more intuitive than many ethnic languages : " esperanto relies entirely on innate reflexes and differs from all other languages in that you can trust your natural tendency to generalize patterns . . . the same word as jean piagetologically applies to generalize grammar " .
the institute of cybernetic pedagogy at paderborn universityanials of germany compared the length of study time it takes natively french-speaking high-school students to obtain comparable ' standard ' levels in esperanto , english , german , and italian .
four primary schools in britain , with 230 pupils , are currently following a course in " propaedeutic esperanto " .
studies have been done in new zealand , united states , denmark , italy and australia .
the results of these studies showed that studying esperanto before another foreign language stops the acquisition of the other , natural language .
learning foreign languages is easier than learning one 's first foreign language .
in one study , a group of european secondary school students studied esperanto for one year , then french for three years , and ended up with a significantly better command of french than a control group , who studied french for all four years .
esperanto is the most widely spoken constructed language in the world .
speakers are most numerous in europe and east asia .
esperanto is mainly used in the northern and central countries of europe ; in china , korea , japan , and iran within asia ; in brazil , argentina , and mexico in the americas ; and in togo in africa .
countering a common criticism against esperanto , the statistician svend nielsen has found there to be no significant correlation between the number of esperanto speakers and similarity of a given national mother language to esperanto .
esperanto is more popular in countries that are rich , with widespread internet access .
there was a slight inverse relationship with esperanto popularity .
sidney s . culbert , a retired psychology professor at the university of washington and a longtime esperantist , who tracked down and tested esperanto speakers in dozens of countries over a period of twenty years .
culbert concluded that between one and two million people speak esperanto at foreign service level 3 , " professionally proficient " sipping able to communicate moderately complex ideas without hesitation , and to follow speeches , radio broadcasts , etc .
culbert 's estimate was not made for esperanto alone , but formed part of his listing of estimates for all languages of more than one million speakers , published annually in the world almanac and book of facts .
culbert 's most detailed account of his methodology is in a 1989 letter to david wolff .
since culbert never published detailed intermediate results for particular countries and regions , it is difficult to independently gauge the accuracy of his results .
in the almanac , his estimates for numbers of language speakers were rounded to the nearest million , thus the number for esperanto speakers is shown as two million .
this latter figure appears in " ethnologue " .
assuming that this is accurate , that means that about 0.03 % of the world 's population speak the language .
although it is not zamenhof 's goal of a universal language , it still represents a level of popularity unmatched by any other constructed language .
marcus sikosek aarhus now ziko van dijkcek has challenged this figure of 1.6 million as exaggerated .
he estimated that even if esperanto speakers were evenly distributed , assuming one million esperanto speakers worldwide would lead one to expect about 180 in the city of cologne .
van dijk finds only 30 fluent speakers in that city .
he also notes that there are about 20,000 members of the various esperanto organizations elmer .
he thinks it unlikely that there are fifty times more speakers than organization members .
in 2017 , svend nielsen estimated around 63,000 esperanto speakers worldwide .
this number was disputed by statistician sten johansson , who questioned the reliability of the source data and highlighted a wide margin of error .
both have said , however , that this new number is likely more realistic than some earlier projections .
in the absence of dr . culbert 's detailed sampling data , or any other census data , it is impossible to state the number of speakers with certainty .
native esperanto speakers , " , " have learned the language from birth from esperanto-speaking parents .
esperanto is the main language of an international family .
the 15th edition of " ethnologue " cited estimates that there were 200 to 2000 native speakers in 1996 , but these figures were removed from the 16th and 17th editions .
the current online version of ethnologue gives l1 users : 1,000 issn corsetti et al 2004 ) .
there were approximately 350 cases of families with native esperanto speakers .
esperantists can access an international culture , including a large body of original and translated literature .
there are more than 25,000 esperanto books , both originals and translations , as well as several regularly distributed esperanto magazines .
in 2013 a museum about esperanto opened in china .
esperantists use the language for free accommodations with esperantists in 92 countries .
every year , esperanto members meet for the world congress of esperanto .
historically , much esperanto music has been in various folk traditions .
there is also a lot of classical and semi-classical choral music , both original and translated , as well as large ensemble music that includes voices singing esperanto texts .
lou harrison , who made musical instruments from many world cultures in his music , used esperanto titles and / or texts in several of his works , most notably abbreviated abbreviated abbreviated abbreviatedcturing .
david gaines used esperanto poems as well as a section from a speech by dr . zamenhof for his " symphony no .
one performs " for mezzo-soprano and orchestrastered 1994 – 98 ) .
he wrote original esperanto text for his ) " i can cry no longer " armour for unaccompanied satb choir lilith .
there are also shared traditions , such as zamenhof day , and shared behaviour patterns .
esperanto is a language spoken primarily in esperanto .
detractors of esperanto occasionally criticize it as " having no culture " .
proponents , such as humphrey tonkin of the university of hartford , observe that esperanto is " culturally neutral by design , as it was intended to be a facilitator between cultures , not to be the carrier of any one national culture " .
the late scottish esperanto author william auld wrote extensively on the subject , arguing that esperanto is " the expression of a common human culture , unencumbered by national frontiers .
thus it is considered a culture on its own .
a number of esperanto associations also advance education in and about the international language esperanto and aim to preserve and promote the culture and heritage of esperanto .
in 2014 , poland added esperanto to its list of intangible heritage .
esperanto has been used in many movies and novels .
this is done either to add the exotic flavour of a foreign language without representing any particular ethnicity .
the charlie chaplin movie " the great dictator " showed jewish ghetto shop signs in esperanto .
two full-length movies have been made with dialogue entirely in esperanto : " , " in 1964 , and " incubus , " a 1965 b-movie horror movie which is also notable for starring william shatner shortly before he began working on " .
captain fantasticanto 2016 sets off a dialogue in esperanto .
finally , movie director alfonso cuaron has publicly shown his fascination for esperanto .
a language school teaching " entrenationo " representing a satire on esperanto shouldn is featured in graham greene 's novel " the confidential agent " .
other amateur productions have been made , such as a dramatization of the novelloid gerda has disappeared mysteriously .
in " stamboul train " , greene used esperanto as the language on signs at the main train station in budapest .
a number of mainstream movies in national languages have used esperanto in some way .
esperanto is used as the universal language in the far future of harry harrison 's " stainless steel rat " and " deathworld " stories .
poul anderson 's story " high treason " takes place in a future where earth became united politically but was still divided into many languages and cultures .
esperanto is said to be the official language of all the peoples of philip jose farmer 's " riverworld " series .
the song was written in esperanto .
it was the first game in the series that was played online .
nobuo uematsu felt that esperanto was a good language to symbolize worldwide unity .
esperanto is the language that triggers all of the wizard 's spells .
a teacher says that esperanto is not very easy to learn .
esperanto is found in the image comics series " saga " as the language blue .
it is made in blue-colored text .
blue is generally only spoken by people of wreath .
some wreath inhabitants use translator rings to communicate with those who don ’ t speak blue .
magic seems to be activated by the linguistic medium of blue .
in the television series " red dwarf " , which begins in the late 22nd century , crewman arnold rimmer constantly spends his time trying to learn esperanto and failing , even compared to his bunkmate dave lister who only maintains a casual interest .
the ship " red dwarf " is written in both english and esperanto .
the novel " infinity welcomes careful drivers " says that although not required , it is widely expected that officers in the space corps be fluent in the language .
esperanto is available in the language selection in the game minecraft .
in season 1 , episode 15 of nickelodeon 's danny phantom , wulf , speaks in esperanto .
in 2010 , she was in the film " supergirl is heard speaking esperanto " .
it is never referred to as esperanto , and serves as a proxy for the language of krypton .
in 1921 the french academy of sciences recommended using esperanto for international scientific communication .
nobel laureate reinhard seltenltenltenltenltenltenltenltenltenltenltenltenltenlten ¥ economics , and nobel laureate reinhard seltenltenltenltenltenltenltenltenltenltenltenltenltenltenltenltenltenltenltenltenltenltenltenltenlten ¥ have published part of their work in esperanto .
frank and selten were among the founders of the international academy of sciences in san marino .
a message in esperanto was recorded and included in " voyager 1 " 's golden record .
esperanto business groups have been active for many years .
the french chamber of commerce did research in the 1920s and reported in " the new york times " in 1921 that esperanto seemed to be the best business language .
he wanted to create an easy language , to create a language ready to use " whether the language be universally accepted or not " .
so zamenhof 's intention was not only to create an easy-to-learn language to help with peace and international understanding as a general language , but also to create a language for immediate use by aleton small workshop .
esperanto was to be an international auxiliary language .
esperanto was the main idea in the early decades of the movement .
later , esperanto speakers began to see the language and the culture that had grown up around it as ends in themselves , even if esperanto is never adopted by the united nations or other international organizations .
esperanto speakers who want to see esperanto adoption officially or on a large scale worldwide are commonly called , from , meaning " final victory " .
there are two kinds of " finvenkismo " – " desubismo " and " desuprismo " .
the second aims to act from abovemind " desupre " prefecture , beginning with politicians .
zamenhof considered the first way to have a better view , as " for such affairs as ours , governments come with their approval and help usually only , when everything is already completely finished " .
those who focus on the intrinsic value of the language are commonly called , from rauma , finland .
however the manifesto de raumo clearly mentions the intention to further spread the language : " we want to spread esperanto to put into effect its positive values more and more , step by step " .
in 1996 the prague manifesto was adopted at the annual congress of the world esperanto association nitrate ueastered ueaʾ .
more recently , language-learning apps like duolingo and amikumu have helped to increase the amount of fluent speakers of esperanto , and find others in their area to speak the language with .
the earliest flag , and the one most commonly used today , has a green five-pointed star against a white canton , upon a field of green .
richard geoghegan , who wrote the first esperanto textbook for english speakers , proposed it in 1887 .
the flag was approved in 1905 by delegates to the first conference of esperantists at boulogne-sur-mer .
a version with an " superimposed over the green star is sometimes seen .
other variants include that for christian esperantists , with a white christian cross superimposed on the green star , and that for leftists , with the color of the field changed from green to red .
in 1987 , a second flag was chosen in a contest organized by the uea celebrating the first centennial of the language .
it featured a white background with two curved " e " s facing each other .
dubbed the " nedella jubilee symbolization " , it attracted criticism from some esperantists , who dubbed it the " " liszt melonhesis " because of the design 's elliptical shape .
it is still in use .
esperanto has been placed in many proposed political situations .
the most popular of these is the european union .
grin 's report was published in 2005 by francois grin .
the report considered a scenario where esperanto would be the lingua franca .
the russian writer nikolai nekrasov was arrested during the stalinist repressions of the late 1930s .
another esperanto writer vladimir varankin was executed on october 3,1938 .
esperanto has served an important role in several religions , such as oomoto from japan and the baha ' i faith from iran .
the oomoto religion encourages esperanto to use esperanto as one of its deified spirits .
the baha ' i faith encourages the use of an auxiliary international language .
baha ' lli was very interested in esperanto , and there was an affinity between esperantists and baha ' is during the late 19th century and early 20th century .
on february 12,1913 , abdu ' l baha gave a talk to the paris esperanto society , in exchange for the purposes of the organization 's knowledge .
now , praise be to god that dr . zamenhof invented the esperanto language .
it has all the potential qualities of becoming the international means of communication .
all of us must be grateful and thankful to him for this noble effort .
with untiring effort and sacrifice on the part of its devotees esperanto will become universal .
every one of us must study this language and spread it as far as possible so that day it may receive recognition , be accepted by all nations and governments of the world .
esperanto is now the language of all future international conferences and congresses .
then perfect union will be established between all the people of the world .
it is now to communicate with various nations .
if one studies fifty languages one may travel through a country and not know the language .
therefore i hope that esperanto may be widely spread .
lidia zamenhof , the daughter of l . l . zamenhof , became a baha ' i around 1925 .
james ferdinand morton , jr . was vice-president of the esperanto league for north america .
ehsan yarshater , the founding editor of " encyclopædia iranica " , notes how as a child in iran he learned esperanto and that when his mother was visiting haifa on a baha ' i pilgrimage he wrote her a letter in persian as well as esperanto .
agnes baldwin alexander became an early supporter of esperanto .
there is an active sub-community of baha ' i esperantists .
in 1973 , the baha ' i esperanto-league for active baha ' i supporters of esperanto was founded .
in 1908 , spiritist camilo chaigneau wrote an article named " spiritism and esperanto " in the periodic " la vie d ' outre-tombe " .
esperanto then became actively promoted by spiritists , at least in brazil , at least by ismael gomes braga and frantisek lorenz .
the brazilian spiritist federation publishes esperanto coursebooks , translations of spiritism 's basic books , and encourages spiritists to become esperantists .
the first translation of the bible into esperanto was a translation of the tanakh or old testament done by l . l . zamenhof .
the translation was published in 1910 at the british and foreign bible society .
in 1926 , it was published along with a new testament translation .
in the 1960s , the esperanto bible was started .
since then , the dutch remonstrant pastor gerrit berveling has translated the deuterocanonical or apocryphal books in addition to new translations of the gospels , some of the new testament epistles , and some books of the tanakh or old testament .
these have been published in several separate booklets , or serialized in , but the deuterocanonical books have appeared in recent editions of the " londona biblio " .
ayatollah khomeini of iran called on muslims to learn esperanto and praised its use as a medium for better understanding among peoples of different religious backgrounds .
after he suggested that esperanto replaced english as an international " lingua franca " .
an esperanto translation of the qur ' an was published by the state shortly after .
esperanto itself has changed little since the publication of “ foundation of esperanto ” ” ” ” independently .
some later constructed languages , such as universal , were based on esperanto .
in modern times , attempts have been made to eliminate perceived sexism in the language , such as riism .
there are some geographical and astronomical features named after esperanto , or after its creator l . l . zamenhof .
these include esperanto island in antarctica , and the asteroids 1421 esperanto and 1462 zamenhof discovered by finnish astronomer and esperantist yrjo vaisala .
