his economical and understated style — which he termed the iceberg theory — had a strong influence on 20th-century fiction , while his adventurous lifestyle and public image brought him admiration from later generations .
hemingway produced most of his work between the mid-1920s and the mid-1950s .
after high school , he was a reporter for a few months for " the kansas city star " before leaving for the italian front to enlist as an ambulance driver in world war i .
he moved to paris where he worked as a foreign correspondent .
he was married to pauline pfeiffer from 1927 until they divorced in 1927 .
they separated after he met mary welsh in london during world war ii .
hemingway went on safari to africa shortly after the publication of " the old man and the sea "ropolis 1952ocation , where he was almost killed in two plane crashes that left him in pain and ill-health for much of the rest of his life .
frank lloyd wright said , " so many churches for so many good people to go to . "
later , ernest hemingway said that he disliked his name .
the family eventually moved into a seven-bedroom home in a respectable neighborhood with a music studio for grace and a medical office for clarence .
as an adult , hemingway hate his mother .
he later said that the music lessons were useful to his writing .
during his junior year , he had a journalism class .
hemingway and marcelline both had pieces for him .
he edited the " trapeze " and the " tabula " yearbook flicked the yearbook yearbook yearbookference , imitating the language of sportswriters , taking the pen name ring name lardner , jr .
although he stayed there for only six months , he relied on the " star " 's style guide as a foundation for his writing : " use short sentences .
hemingway responded to a red cross recruitment effort in kansas city and signed on to become an ambulance driver in italy .
on his first day in milan , he was sent to the scene of a munitions factory explosion .
he described the incident in his non-fiction book " death in the afternoon " : " i remember that after we searched quite thoroughly for the complete dead we collected fragments . "
on july 8 , he was seriously wounded by mortar fire .
hemingway helped italian soldiers to safety .
he had suffered severe shrapnel wounds to both legs , and had an immediate operation at a distribution center before he was transferred to the red cross hospital in milan .
he spent six months at the hospital .
while recuperating , he fell in love for the first time with agnes von kurowsky , a red cross nurse seven years his senior .
hemingway returned to the united states .
however , in march , she wrote that she had become engaged to an italian officer .
jeffrey meyers ' book " hemingway : a biography " that hemingway was devastated by agnes 's rejection , and in future relationships , he followed a pattern of abandoning a wife before she abandoned him .
he was not able to tell them how scared he had been " in another country with surgeons who could not tell him in english if his leg was coming off or not . "
he was offered a job in toronto .
he returned to michigan the following june and then moved to chicago in september 1920 to live with friends .
in chicago , he worked as an associate editor of the monthly journal " cooperative commonwealth " .
when st . louis native hadley richardson came to chicago to visit hemingway 's sister , hemingway became infatuated .
despite the difference , hadley seemed less mature than usual for a young woman .
the two corresponded for a few months .
they wanted to visit rome , but sherwood anderson convinced them to visit paris instead , writing letters of introduction for the young couple .
hemingway was hired as foreign correspondent for the " toronto star " .
hemingway 's marriage to hadley , hemingway said : " with hadley , hemingway achieved everything he had hoped for with agnes : the love of a beautiful woman , a comfortable income , a life in europe " .
hemingway 's first biographer , carlos baker , said that while anderson suggested paris because " the monetary exchange rate " made it an inexpensive place to live , more importantly it was where " the most interesting people in the world " lived .
hemingway met american writer and art collector gertrude stein , irish novelist james joyce , american poet ezra poundheimer .
she introduced him to the montparnasse quarter , whom she referred to as the " lost generation " .
he introduced hemingway to james joyce , with whom hemingway frequently went on " alcoholic sprees " .
he also wrote travel pieces such as " tuna fishing in spain " and " trout fishing all across europe : spain has the best , then germany " .
hemingway was devastated on learning that hadley had lost a suitcase filled with his manuscripts at the gare de lyon as she was traveling to geneva to meet him in december 1922 .
the following september , the couple returned to toronto , where their son john hadley nicanor was born on october 10,1923 .
the third was written early the year in italy .
hemingway had written the previous summer during his first visit to spain .
he missed paris , considered toronto boring , and wanted to return to the life of a writer , rather than live the life of a journalist .
hemingway helped ford madox ford edit " the transatlantic review " .
in 1925 , the dust jacket was published .
critics in the united states praised hemingway for his good use of declarative sentences .
hemingway read it , liked it , and decided his next work had to be a novel .
he is referred to as " papa " , even by much older friends .
hemingway later said that he liked to be looked up to everyone .
hemingway 's friend bill smith , donald ogden stewart , lady duff twysden , and her lover pat guthrie lived in pamplona until they divorced .
a few days after the fiesta ended , on july 21 , he began to write the draft of what would become " the sun also rises " , finishing eight weeks later .
hemingway began revising the manuscript extensively .
pauline pfeiffer joined them in january and against hadley 's advice , urged hemingway to sign a contract with scribner 's .
the manuscript arrived in new york in april 1926 .
hemingway himself later wrote to his editor max perkins that the " point of the book " was not so much about a generation being lost , but that " the earth abideth forever " ; he believed the characters in " the sun also rises " may have been " battered " but were not lost .
he planned his next collection of short stories , " men without women " , published in october 1927 .
pauline wanted to move back to america .
john dos passos recommended key west , and they left paris in march 1928 .
hemingway suffered a severe injury in their paris bathroom when he pulled a skylight down on his head thinking he was pulling on a toilet chain .
after his birth , pauline and hemingway traveled to wyoming , massachusetts , and new york .
in the winter , he was in new york with bumby , about to go to florida .
hemingway was devastated , having written to his father telling him not to worry about money .
he realized how hadley must have felt after her own father 's suicide in 1903 .
hemingway returned to key west in december .
hemingway was still working on the ending , which he may have rewritten as many as seventeen times .
he wanted to write a comprehensive treatise on bullfighting , explaining the " toreros " and " corridas " complete with glossaries and appendices , because he believed bullfighting was " of great tragic interest , being literally of life and death . "
hemingway lived his winters in key west and summers in wyoming .
hemingway was hospitalized for seven weeks , with pauline tending to him .
pauline 's uncle bought the couple a house in key west with a carriage house .
the couple visited mombasa , nairobi , and machakos in kenya .
during these travels , hemingway got sick with amoebic dysentery that caused a prolapsed intestine .
hemingway returned to key west in early 1934 .
in 1935 he first arrived at bimini , where he spent a lot of time .
during this period he also worked on " to have and have not " , published in 1937 while he was in spain .
he wanted hemingway to replace john dos passos as screenwriter .
later , dos passos left spain out of cowardice .
he also rubbed shoulders with us volunteers fighting on the republican side .
hemingway met in key west the previous christmashammer 1936orf .
he returned to key west for a few months , then back to spain twice in 1938 .
pauline and the children left hemingway that summer , after the family was reunited during a visit to wyoming .
hemingway moved his summer home to ketchum , idaho , just outside the newly built resort of sun valley , and moved his winter home to cuba .
he had been disgusted when a parisian friend allowed his cats to eat from the table , but he became enamored of cats in cuba and kept dozens of them on the property .
it became a book-of-the-month club choice , sold half a million copies within months .
hemingway went with her , sending in dispatches for the newspaper " pm " , but in general he disliked china .
they returned to cuba before the declaration of war by the united states that december , when he convinced the cuban government to help him refit the " pilar " , which he intended to use to ambush german submarines off the coast of cuba .
when he arrived in london , he met " time " magazine correspondent mary welsh .
hemingway refused to help her get a press pass on a plane .
hemingway 's last time was in march 1945 as he was preparing to return to cuba .
hemingway accompanied the troops to the normandy landings wearing a large head bandage , according to meyers , but he was considered " precious cargo " and not allowed ashore .
hemingway later wrote in " collier 's " that he could see " the first , second , third , fourth and fifth waves of landing troops lay where they had fallen .
hemingway returned to the " dorothea dix " .
hemingway became leader to a small band of village militia in rambouillet outside paris .
hemingway got into considerable trouble playing infantry captain to a group of people that he gathered .
hemingway was brought up on formal charges .
on august 25 , he was present at the liberation of paris as a journalist .
in paris , he visited sylvia beach and pablo picasso with mary welsh , who joined him there .
lanham handed him to the doctors , who hospitalized him with pneumonia .
hemingway was recognized for having been " under fire in combat areas in order to get an accurate picture of conditions " .
in 1946 , he married mary .
mary broke her right ankle and then her left in skiing accidents .
in 1947 , a car accident left patrick with a head wound and severely ill .
hemingway began to die soon after , and the rest of his life was max perkins , hemingway 's long-time scribner 's editor and friend .
during this period , he suffered from severe headaches , high blood pressure , weight problems , and eventually diabetes .
during the post-war years , he also began work on a trilogy titled " the land " , " the sea " and " the air " .
hemingway 's inability to continue was " a symptom of his troubles " during these years .
the platonic love affair inspired the novel " across the river and into the trees " .
he wrote the draft of " the old man and the sea " in eight weeks , saying that it was " the best i can write ever for all of my life " .
hemingway won the pulitzer prize in 1952 .
the next day , trying to reach medical care in entebbe , they boarded a second plane that exploded at take-off , with hemingway suffering burns and another concussion , which was serious enough to cause leaking of cerebral fluid .
despite his injuries , hemingway accompanied patrick and his wife on a fishing expedition in february .
when a bushfire broke out , he was again injured .
months later in venice , mary reported to friends the full extent of hemingway 's injuries : two cracked discs , a kidney and liver rupture , a dislocated shoulder and a broken skull .
he modestly told the press that carl sandburg , isak dinesen and bernard berenson deserved the prize , but he refused to accept the prize money .
hemingway " had coveted the nobel prize " , but when he won it , months after his plane accidents and the worldwide press coverage , " there must have been a lingering suspicion in hemingway 's mind that his obituary notices had played a part in the academy 's decision . "
he was told to stop drinking .
during the trip , hemingway became sick again and was treated for " high blood pressure , liver disease , and arteriosclerosis " .
in november 1956 , while staying in paris , he reminded of trunks he had stored in the ritz hotel in 1928 and never retrieved .
when he was re-claiming and opening the trunks , hemingway discovered they were filled with notebooks and writing from his paris years .
excited about the discovery , when he returned to cuba in early 1957 , he began to shape the work into his memoir " a moveable feast " .
by 1959 , he ended a period of intense activity : he finished " a moveable feast " .
the last three were stored in a safe deposit box in havana , as he focused on the finishing touches for " a moveable feast " .
hemingway was not able to get into a depression , but he did not recover .
hemingway began to become unhappy with life there , considered a permanent move to idaho .
in 1959 he bought a home overlooking the big wood river , outside ketchum , and left cuba .
he was in cuba in 1959 , between returning from pamplona and traveling west to idaho , and the following year for his 61st birthday .
after the 1961 bay of pigs invasion , the finca vigia was expropriated by the cuban government .
hemingway continued to work on the material that was published as " a moveable feast " through the 1950s .
in mid-1959 , he visited spain to study bullfighting articles commissioned by " life " magazine .
he was unable to organize his writing for the first time in his life .
he set up a small office in his new york city apartment and attempted to work , but he left new york for good soon after .
he then traveled alone to spain to be photographed for the front cover of " life " magazine .
a few days later , the news reported that he was seriously ill and on the verge of dying , which panicked mary until she received a cable from him telling her , " reports false .
he was lonely and took to his bed for days , and he was quiet .
in october , he left spain for new york .
he worried about his taxes and that he would never return to cuba to get the manuscripts that he had left in a bank vault .
the fbi had opened a file on him during world war ii .
by the end of november , mary was at her wits ' end .
hemingway was at the mayo clinic .
meyers writes that " an aura of secrecy surrounds hemingway 's treatment at the mayo " .
hemingway was back in ketchum in april 1961 .
she called saviers , who sedated him and admitted him to the sun valley hospital .
he was released in late june and arrived home in june 30 , and he " quite deliberately " shot himself with his shotgun in the early morning hours of july 2,1961 .
he had unlocked the basement storeroom where his guns were kept , gone upstairs to the front entrance foyer , and shot himself with the " double-barreled shotgun that he had used so often it might have been a friend " .
mary called the sun valley hospital .
she returned home the next day where she cleaned the house and saw to the funeral and travel arrangements .
bernice kert writes that it " did not seem to her a conscious lie " when she told the press that his death had been accidental .
hemingway 's brother , leicester , wrote : " it seemed to me ernest would have approved of it all . "
hemingway 's behavior during his last years had been similar to that of his father before he killed himself .
hemingway wrote " the sun also rises " .
hemingway was awarded the nobel prize in literature in 1954 .
henry louis gates believes hemingway 's style was fundamentally shaped " in reaction to his experience of world war " .
after world war i , he and other modernists " lost faith in the central institutions of western civilization " .
he began as a writer of short stories .
hemingway called his style the iceberg theory : the facts float above water ; the supporting structure and symbolism operate out of sight .
hemingway believed the writer could describe one thingtish like nick adams fishing in " the big two-hearted river "arth .
hemingway 's first book , " in our time " , showed he was experimenting with his writing style .
hemingway used his experiences and drew them out with " what if i were wounded in such a way that i could not sleep at night ?
hemingway wrote " the art of the short story " .
if you leave out important things or events that you know about , the story is strengthened .
zoe trodd believes hemingway crafted skeletal sentences in response to henry james 's observation that world war i had " used up words " .
intentional omissions allow the reader to fill the gap , as though responding to instructions from the author , and create three-dimensional prose .
many of hemingway 's followers misinterpreted his lead and frowned upon all expression of emotion ; saul bellow satirized this style as " do you have emotions ?
hemingway 's intent was to eliminate emotion , but to portray it more scientifically .
hemingway thought it would be easy , and pointless , to describe emotions .
hemingway 's work depends on its themes of love , war , wilderness , and loss .
this extended in hemingway 's work to include mountains in spain , switzerland and africa , and to the streams of michigan .
hemingway 's work says that nature is a place for rebirth and rest .
although hemingway does write about sports , such as fishing , carlos baker notes the emphasis is more on the athlete than the sport .
hemingway 's work can be seen in the light of american naturalism .
hemingway 's works " have given new visibility to hemingway 's female charactersiciencies and their strengths strengths strengths strengths strengthschouse and have revealed his sensitivity to gender issues .
nina baym believes that brett ashley and margot macomber are the two best examples of hemingway 's ' bitch women .
young believes the emphasis in " indian camp " was not so much on the woman who gives birth or the father who kills himself , but on nick adams who witnesses these events as a child , and becomes a " badly scarred and nervous young man " .
stoltzfus considers hemingway 's work to be more complex .
francis macomber dies happy because the last hours of his life are authentic .
hemingway 's fiction is successful because the characters live an " authentic life " .
hemingway 's " sun also rises " is used in hemingway 's book " the sun " .
fiedler says that many women had their own generation , including the women who had been hurt , and that women had become slaves .
her character supports the theme not only because the idea was presented early on in the novel but also the impact she had on cohn in the start of the book while only appearing a small number of times .
susan beegel has written that some more recent critics have characterized the social era as misogynistic and homophobic .
she also found that " critics interested in multiculturalism " , particularly in the 1980s , simply ignored hemingway , although some " apologetics " have been written .
hemingway 's 1926 novel " the sun also rises " , in which a critic said : " hemingway never lets the reader forget that cohn is a jew , not an unattractive character who happens to be a jew but a character who is unattractive because he is a jew " .
also during the 1980s , criticism was published that was focused on investigating the horror of homosexuality and the " racism " typical of the social era played in hemingway 's fiction .
after his reputation was established with the publication of " the sun also rises " , he became the spokesperson for the post-world war i generation .
hemingway 's legacy is that " hemingway left stories and novels so starkly moving that some have become part of our cultural heritage . "
in a letter to hemingway , salinger said that he gave him his only hopeful minutes of the entire war .
ray bradbury wrote " the kilimanjaro device " , with hemingway transported to the top of mount kilimanjaro .
the influence is evident with the many restaurants named " hemingway " .
hemingway 's son jack bumby aston has pieces such as the " kilimanjaro " bedside table , and a " catherine " slip-covered sofa .
in 1980 , a group of hemingway scholars gathered to find the hemingways ' papers .
her death was ruled as a suicide by the nazis .
hemingway is on the u . s . national register of historic places : the ernest hemingway cottage on walloon lake , michigan , designated in 1968 ; the ernest hemingway house in key west , designated in 1968 ; and the ernest and mary hemingway house in ketchum , designated in 2015 .
