the glissando is a line of instruments such as the piano , harp , and fretted stringed instruments .
the drum could be thought of as capable of either glissando or portamento , depending on whether the drum was rolled or not .
the clarinet gesture that opens " rhapsody in blue " could be thought of either way : it was originally planned as a glissandotness gershwin 's score labels each individual note label but is in practice played as a portamento though described as a glissando .
on some instruments , like piano , harp , xylophoneophoneophoneophoneophoneophoneophone , discrete tones are clearly audible when sliding .
for example , on a keyboard , a player 's fingertips can be made to slide across the white keys or over the black keys .
organ players sometimes use an effect known as the palm glissando .
on a harp , the player can slide their finger across the strings , quickly playing the scalestrel even arpeggios such as czong-d-eised-f-graph-a ¥-braph .
wind , brass , and fretted-stringed-instrument players can perform a very rapid chromatic scale .
maurice ravel 's piece alborada del gracioso has important piano glissando passages in thirds executed by the right hand .
arpeggio effects bowie also get the stringsferact playing harmonics trombones optionally and brass , especially the horn .
musical instruments with can effect a portamento over a very long range .
the strings are made of a slide , including the strings , the guitar , veena , and the sitar .
brass and woodwind instruments such as the trumpet or flute can effect a similar limited slide by altering the lip pressureometers .
many electric guitars are fitted with a tremolo arm .
a bent note is a musical note that is different in pitch .
with unfretted strings , or other continuous-pitch instruments such as the trombone , or with the human voice , such variation is more properly described in terms of intonation .
bent notes are usually played on fretted instruments , which are made of using a finger -lrb- such as the harmonica -rrb- .
on brass instruments such as the trumpet , the note is bent by using the lip .
" indeterminately pitched instruments such as unpitched percussion instruments and friction drum rolls . . produce a pitch or pitch spectrum that becomes higher with an increase of dynamic and lower with a decrease of dynamic " .
the bent note is used in many forms of blues and jazz .
