In the case of its broad associative definition, government normally consists of legislature, executive, and judiciary.
Government is a means by which organizational policies are enforced, as well as a mechanism for determining policy.
Typically the philosophy chosen is some balance between the principle of individual freedom and the idea of absolute state authority (tyranny).
While all types of organizations have governance, the word "government" is often used more specifically to refer to the approximately 200 independent national governments on Earth, as well as subsidiary organizations.
The main aspect of any philosophy of government is how political power is obtained, with the two main forms being electoral contest and hereditary succession.
Libertarianism and anarchism are political ideologies that seeks to limit or abolish government, finding government disruptive to self organization and freedom.
The Columbia Encyclopedia defines government as "a system of social control under which the right to make laws, and the right to enforce them, is vested in a particular group in society".
While all types of organizations have governance, the word "government" is often used more specifically to refer to the approximately 200 independent national governments on Earth, as well as their subsidiary organizations.
The moment and place that the phenomenon of human government developed is lost in time; however, history does record the formations of early governments.
By the third to second millenniums BC, some of these had developed into larger governed areas: Sumer, Ancient Egypt, the Indus Valley Civilization, and the Yellow River Civilization.
The development of agriculture and water control projects were a catalyst for the development of governments.
On occasion a chief of a tribe was elected by various rituals or tests of strength to govern his tribe, sometimes with a group of elder tribesmen as a council.
The human ability to precisely communicate abstract, learned information allowed humans to become ever more effective at agriculture, and that allowed for ever increasing population densities.
Starting at the end of the 17th century, the prevalence of republican forms of government grew.
The Glorious Revolution in England, the American Revolution, and the French Revolution contributed to the growth of representative forms of government.
Since the fall of the Berlin Wall, liberal democracy has become an even more prevalent form of government.
This included the regulation of corporations and the development of the welfare state.
Like all categories discerned within forms of government, the boundaries of government classifications are either fluid or ill-defined.
Identifying a form of government is also difficult because many political systems originate as socio-economic movements and are then carried into governments by parties naming themselves after those movements; all with competing political-ideologies.
Experience with those movements in power, and the strong ties they may have to particular forms of government, can cause them to be considered as forms of government in themselves.
Other complications include general non-consensus or deliberate "distortion or bias" of reasonable technical definitions to political ideologies and associated forms of governing, due to the nature of politics in the modern era.
However, during the era of segregation many Southern Democrats were conservatives, and they played a key role in the Conservative Coalition that controlled Congress from 1937 to 1963.
Even the most liberal democracies limit rival political activity to one extent or another while the most tyrannical dictatorships must organize a broad base of support thereby creating difficulties for "pigeonholing" governments into narrow categories.
Examples include the claims of the United States as being a plutocracy rather than a democracy since some American voters believe elections are being manipulated by wealthy Super PACs.
An autocracy is a system of government in which supreme power is concentrated in the hands of one person, whose decisions are subject to neither external legal restraints nor regularized mechanisms of popular control (except perhaps for the implicit threat of a coup d'état or mass insurrection).
The term "Aristocracy" could also refer to the non-peasant, non-servant, and non-city classes in the Feudal system.
In a direct democracy, the citizens as a whole form a governing body and vote directly on each issue.
In a constitutional democracy the powers of the majority are exercised within the framework of a representative democracy, but the constitution limits the majority and protects the minority, usually through the enjoyment by all of certain individual rights, e.g.
A republic is a form of government in which the country is considered a "public matter" (Latin: "res publica"), not the private concern or property of the rulers, and where offices of states are subsequently directly or indirectly elected or appointed rather than inherited.
The people, or some significant portion of them, have supreme control over the government and where offices of state are elected or chosen by elected people.
A common simplified definition of a republic is a government where the head of state is not a monarch.
Montesquieu included both democracies, where all the people have a share in rule, and aristocracies or oligarchies, where only some of the people rule, as republican forms of government.
Federalism is a political concept in which a "group" of members are bound together by covenant with a governing representative head.
The term "federalism" is also used to describe a system of government in which sovereignty is constitutionally divided between a central governing authority and constituent political units, variously called states, provinces or otherwise.
Federalism is a system based upon democratic principles and institutions in which the power to govern is shared between national and provincial/state governments, creating what is often called a federation.
Experience with those movements in power and the strong ties they may have to particular forms of government can cause them to be considered as forms of government in themselves.
This list focuses on differing approaches that political systems take to the distribution of sovereignty, and the autonomy of regions within the state.