Earth is the planet we live on.
It is the third planet from the Sun.
It is the only planet known to have life on it.
The Earth formed around 4.5 billion years ago.
It is one of four rocky planets on the inside of the Solar System.
The other three are Mercury, Venus and Mars.
The large mass of the Sun makes Earth move around it, just as the mass of Earth makes the moon move around it.
Earth also turns around in space, so that different parts face the Sun at different times.
Earth goes around the Sun once (one "year") for every 365⁄ times it turns around (one "day").
Earth is the only planet in our solar system that has a large amount of liquid water.
About 74% of the surface of Earth is covered by liquid or frozen water.
Because of this, people sometimes call it "blue planet".
Because of its water, Earth is home to millions of species of plants and animals.
The things that live on Earth have changed its surface greatly.
For example, early cyanobacteria changed the air and gave it oxygen.
The living part of Earth's surface is called the "biosphere".
Earth is part of the eight planets and many thousands of small bodies that move around the Sun as its solar system.
The Solar System is moving through the Orion Arm of the Milky Way galaxy now, and will be for about the next 10,000 years.
Earth is about 150,000,000 km away from the Sun (this distance is called an "Astronomical Unit").
It moves on its orbit at an average speed of about 30 km/s.
Earth turns all the way around about 365⁄ times in the time it takes for Earth to go all the way around the Sun.
To make up this extra bit of a day every year, an additional day is used every four years.
This is named a "leap year".
The Moon goes around Earth at an average distance of 250,000 mi.
It is locked to Earth, so that it always has the same half facing Earth; the other half is called the "dark side of the moon".
It takes about 27⁄ days for the Moon to go all the way around Earth, but because Earth is moving around the Sun at the same time, it takes about 29⁄ days for the Moon to go from dark to bright to dark again.
This is where the word "month" came from, even though most months now have 30 or 31 days.
Earth and the other planets formed about 4.6 billion years ago.
They were made of the leftover gas from the nebula that made the Sun.
The Moon may have been formed after a collision between the early Earth and a smaller planet (sometimes called "Theia").
Scientists believe that parts of both planets broke off — becoming (by gravity) the Moon.
Earth's water came from different places.
Condensing water vapour, and comets and asteroids hitting Earth, made the oceans.
Within a billion years (that is at about 3.6 billion years ago) the first life evolved, in the Archaean era.
Some bacteria developed photosynthesis, which lets plants make food from the Sun's light and water.
This released a lot of oxygen, which was first taken up by iron in solution.
Eventually, free oxygen got into the atmosphere or air, making Earth's surface suitable for aerobic life (see Great Oxygenation Event).
This oxygen also formed the ozone layer which protects Earth's surface from bad ultraviolet radiation from the Sun.
Complex life on the surface of the land did not exist before the ozone layer.
Earth's land and climate has been very different in the past.
About 3 to 3.5 million years ago almost all land was in one place.
This is called a supercontinent.
The earliest known supercontinent was called Vaalbara.
Much later, there was a time (the Cryogenian) when Earth was almost entirely covered by thick ice sheets (glaciers).
This is discussed as the Snowball Earth theory.
It is the largest of the rocky planets moving around the Sun by mass and by size.
It is much smaller than the gas giants such as Jupiter.
Overall, Earth is made of iron (32.1%), oxygen (30.1%), silicon (15.1%), magnesium (13.9%), sulfur (2.9%), nickel (1.8%), calcium (1.5%), and aluminium (1.4%).
The 1.2% left over is made of many different kinds of other chemicals.
Chemicals that are very uncommon (such as gold and platinum) can be very valuable.
The structure of Earth changes from the inside to the outside.
The center of earth (Earth's core) is mostly iron (88.8%), nickel (5.8%), sulfur (4.5%), and less than 1% other things.
The Earth's crust is largely oxygen (47%).
Oxygen is normally a gas but it can join with other chemicals to make compounds like water and rocks.
99.22% of rocks have oxygen in them.
The most common oxygen-having rocks are silica (made with silicon), alumina (made with aluminium), rust (made with iron), lime (made with calcium), magnesia (made with magnesium), potash (made with potassium), and sodium oxide, and there are others as well.
Earth's shape is a spheroid: not quite a sphere because it is slightly squashed on the top and bottom.
The shape is called an oblate spheroid.
As Earth spins around itself, the centrifugal force forces the equator out a little and pulls the poles in a little.
The equator, around the middle of Earth's surface, is about 40,075 km long.
The highest mountain above sea level—the well-known Mount Everest (which is 8848 m above sea level)—is "not" actually the one that is the farthest away from the center of the Earth.
Instead, the sleeping volcano Mount Chimborazo in Ecuador is; it is only 6263 m above sea level but it is almost at the equator.
Because of this, Mount Chimborazo is 6,384 km from the center of the Earth, while Mount Everest is 2 km closer to it.
Similarly, the lowest point below sea level that we are conscious of is the Challenger Deep in the Mariana Trench in the Pacific Ocean.
It is about 10971 m below sea level, but, again, there are probably places at the bottom of the Arctic Ocean that are nearer to the center of the Earth.
The deepest hole ever dug is only about 12.3 km.
We know something about the inside of the Earth, though, because we can learn things from earthquakes and the times when volcanoes erupt.
We are able to see how quickly the shock waves move through Earth in different places.
The inside of Earth is very different from the outside.
Almost all of Earth's liquid water is in the seas or close to the surface.
The surface also has a lot of oxygen, which comes from plants.
Small and simple kinds of life can live far under the surface, but animals and plants only live on the surface or in the seas.
The rocks on the surface of Earth (Earth's crust) are well known.
They are thicker where there is land, between 30 to thick.
Under the seas they are sometimes only 6 km thick.
There are three groups of rocks that make up most of the Earth's crust.
Some rock is made when the hot liquid rock comes from inside the earth (igneous rocks); another type of rock is made when sediment is laid down, usually under the sea (sedimentary rocks); and a third kind of rock is made when the other two are changed by very high temperature or pressure (metamorphic rocks).
A very few rocks also fall out of the sky (meteorites).
Below the crust is warm and almost-liquid rock that is always moving around (the Earth's mantle).
Then, there is a thin liquid layer of heated rock (the outer core).
This is very hot: 7000 °C.
The middle of the inside of the Earth would be liquid as well but all the weight of the rock above it pushes it back into being solid.
This solid middle part (the inner core) is almost all iron.
This is what makes the Earth magnetic.
The Earth's crust is solid but made of parts which move very slowly.
The thin level of hard rock on the outside of the Earth rests on hot liquid material below it in the deeper mantle.
This liquid material moves because it gets heat from the hot center of the earth.
The slow movement of the plates is what causes earthquakes, volcanoes and large groups of mountains on the Earth.
There are three ways plates can come together.
Two plates can move towards each other ("convergent" plate edges).
This can form islands (such as Japan), volcanoes, and high mountain ranges (such as the Andes and Himalayas).
Two plates can move away from each other ("divergent" plate edges).
This gives the warm liquid rock inside the earth a place to come out.
This makes special mountain ranges below the sea or large low lands like Africa's Great Rift Valley.
Plates are able to move beside each other as well ("transform" plate edges, such as the San Andreas Fault).
This makes their edges crush against each other and makes many shocks as they move.
The outside of the Earth is not even.
There are high places called mountains, and high flat places called plateaus.
There are low places called valleys and canyons.
For the most part, moving air and water from the sky and seas damages rocks in high places and breaks them into small pieces.
The air and water then move these pieces to lower places.
Because of this, the Earth would have been very flat a long time before now.
The fundamental cause of the differences in the Earth's surface is plate tectonics.
The shape of the entire planet itself is not even a ball.
Because of its velocity, Earth has a slight bulge at the Equator.
Other than that, Earth is shaped more like a pear than an actual sphere.
All places on Earth are made of, or are on top of, rocks.
The outside of the Earth is usually not uncovered rock.
Over 70% of the Earth is covered by seas full of salty water.
This salty water makes up about 97⁄% of all Earth's water.
The fresh water people can drink is mostly ice.
Only a very small amount is in rivers and under the Earth for people to drink and use.
The air above the Earth stops the water from going away into outer space.
Also, much of the land on Earth is covered with plants, or with what is left from earlier living things.
Places with very little rain are dry wastes called deserts.
Deserts usually have few living things, but life is able to grow very quickly when these wastes have rainfall.
Places with large amounts of rain may be large woods.
Lately, people have changed the environment of the Earth a great deal.