a paradox is a statement that , despite apparently valid reasoning from true premises , leads to an apparently-self-contradictory or logically unacceptable conclusion .
a paradox is a paradox where the contradictory elements exist at the same time and persist over time .
some logical paradoxes are known to be invalid arguments but are still valuable in promoting critical thinking .
some paradoxes have proved errors in mathematical definitions assumed to be rigorous , and have caused axioms of mathematics and logic to be re-examined .
russell 's paradox is a paradox in which the russell 's paradox is used to determine the existence of a set of properties .
other such as curry 's paradox , are not resolved .
examples outside logic include the ship of theseus from philosophynington questioning whether a ship repaired over time by replacing each and all of its wooden parts , one at a time , would remain the same ship percival .
paradoxes can also be used to describe objects that have a strange effect .
for example , m . c . escher featured perspective-based paradoxes in many of his drawings , with walls that are regarded as floors from other points of view , and staircases that appear to climb endlessly .
the word " paradox " often means ironic or unexpected .
paradoxes are common themes in paradoxes , such as self-reference , infinite regress , circular definitions , and confusion or equivocation between different levels of abstraction .
other paradoxes include false statements telling " ' impossible ' is not a word in my vocabulary " , a simple paradoxometerometers or half-truths and the resulting biased assumptions .
this form is common in howlers .
for example , consider a situation in which a father and his son are driving down the road .
the car crashes into a tree and the father is killed .
the boy is rushed to the nearest hospital where he is prepared for emergency surgery .
when the surgery-suite , the surgeon says , " i can ’ t operate on this boy .
the paradox is caused by a hasty generalization , for if the surgeon is the boy 's father , the statement declares that it is true .
the paradox is resolved if the surgeon is a woman — the boy ’ s mother .
paradoxes which are not based on a hidden error generally occur at the fringes of context or language .
paradoxes that arise from apparently intelligible uses of language are often of interest to logicians and philosophers .
" this sentence is false " is an example of the well-known liar paradox : it is consistently interpreted as either true or false , because if it is known to be false , then it must be false , and if it is known to be true , then then it is known that it must be false .
russell 's paradox was a paradox in logic and set theory .
thought-experiments can also make interesting paradoxes .
the paradox is a paradox that would arise if a time-traveler were to kill his grandfather before his mother or father had been conceived .
this is a specific example of the more general observation of the butterfly effect .
often a seemingly paradoxical conclusion arises from a inconsistent or contradictory definition of the initial premise .
in the case of that apparent paradox of a time-traveler killing his own grandfather , it is the inconsistency of defining the past to which he returns as somehow different from the one which leads up to the future from which he begins his trip .
a fourth kind has sometimes been described since quine 's work .
a taste for paradox is central to the philosophies of laozi , zeno of elea , zhuangzi , heraclitus , bhartrhari , meister eckhart , hegel , kierkegaard , g . k . chesterton , among many others .
the paradox is like the lover without passion .
but the ultimate potentiation of every passion is always to its own downfall , and so it is also the ultimate passion of the understanding to will the collision , although in one way or another the collision must become its downfall .
this is the ultimate paradox of thought : to want to discover something that thought itself wasn wasn ’ t aware .
a paradoxical reaction to a drug is the opposite of what one would expect .
some are common and are used regularly in medicine , such as the use of stimulants such as adderall and ritalin in the treatment of attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder disorder disorder .
