a paradox is a paradox where the contradictory elements exist at the same time and persist over time .
some paradoxes have proved errors in mathematical definitions assumed to be rigorous , and have caused axioms of mathematics and logic to be re-examined .
russell 's paradox is a paradox in which the russell 's paradox is used to determine the existence of a set of properties .
examples outside logic include the ship of theseus from philosophynington questioning whether a ship repaired over time by replacing each and all of its wooden parts , one at a time , would remain the same ship percival .
for example , m . c . escher featured perspective-based paradoxes in many of his drawings , with walls that are regarded as floors from other points of view , and staircases that appear to climb endlessly .
other paradoxes include false statements telling " ' impossible ' is not a word in my vocabulary " , a simple paradoxometerometers or half-truths and the resulting biased assumptions .
for example , consider a situation in which a father and his son are driving down the road .
the car crashes into a tree and the father is killed .
when the surgery-suite , the surgeon says , " i can ’ t operate on this boy .
the paradox is caused by a hasty generalization , for if the surgeon is the boy 's father , the statement declares that it is true .
the paradox is resolved if the surgeon is a woman — the boy ’ s mother .
paradoxes which are not based on a hidden error generally occur at the fringes of context or language .
this sentence is false " is an example of the well-known liar paradox : it is consistently interpreted as either true or false , because if it is known to be false , then it must be false , and if it is known to be true , then then it is known that it must be false .
the paradox is a paradox that would arise if a time-traveler were to kill his grandfather before his mother or father had been conceived .
in the case of that apparent paradox of a time-traveler killing his own grandfather , it is the inconsistency of defining the past to which he returns as somehow different from the one which leads up to the future from which he begins his trip .
a taste for paradox is central to the philosophies of laozi , zeno of elea , zhuangzi , heraclitus , bhartrhari , meister eckhart , hegel , kierkegaard , g . k . chesterton , among many others .
a paradoxical reaction to a drug is the opposite of what one would expect .
some are common and are used regularly in medicine , such as the use of stimulants such as adderall and ritalin in the treatment of attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder disorder disorder .