idiot was a legal and psychiatric category of profound intellectual disability .
it was replaced by the term " profound mental retardation " .
nowadays , idiot is a rude term for a stupid person .
the word " idiot " comes from the greek , " idiotes " ' a private person , ' a private citizen ' , ' a common man ' , ' a person lacking professional skill , layman ' , later ' unskilled ' , ' ignorant ' from idios ' private , " " " " ' private " ' .
in latin , " idiota " was borrowed in the meaning ' uneducated ' , ' ignorant ' , ' common ' , and in late latin came to mean ' crude , illiterate , ignorant ' .
in french , it kept the meaning of ' illiterate ' , ' ignorant ' , and added the meaning ' stupid ' in the 13th century .
in english , it added the meaning ' mentally deficient ' in the 14th century .
many political commentators , starting as early as 1856 , have interpreted the word " idiot " as reflecting the ancient greeks ' attitudes to civic participation and private life .
this is how the greeks used the word .
the greeks valued civic participation .
thucydides quotes pericles ' funeral oration as saying : " we regard . . him who takes no part in these public duties not as unambitious but as useless " τον τε με τε τωνδε τε τωνδε τε τε τε τε τε με τε τε τε τε τε τε με τε τε τε τε τεμε τε τε τε τε τε τε τε τε τωνδε τε τε τε τε τε τε τε τε τωνδε τε τε τε τε τε τε τε τε τε τε τωνδε τε τε τε τε τε τε τε τε τε τε τε τε τε τε τε τε τε τε
the term " idiot " was used for a kind of non-participants , or in a derogatory sense .
the political meaning came in centuries after the political system of the united states .
in 19th and early 20th century , an " idiot " was a person with a very profound intellectual disability .
in the early 1900s , dr . henry h . goddard proposed a classification system for intellectual disability based on the binet-simon concept of mental age .
individuals with the lowest mental age levelled less than three years ago were identified as " idiots " .
the term " idiot " was first used to mean people having an iq below 30 iq , or intelligence quotient .
the concept of mental age has fallen into disfavor , though and iq is now based on statistical distributions .
in the obsolete medical classification , these people were said to have " profound mental retardation " or " profound mental subnormality " with iq under 20 .
the term is not used in the united kingdom .
until 2007 , the california penal code section 26 said that idiots were one of six types of people who are not capable of committing crimes .
in 2007 the code was changed to read “ persons who are mentally incapacitated . ”
in 2008 , iowa voters passed a measure replacing " idiot , or insane person " in the state 's constitution with " person adjudged mentally incompetent . "
the constitution of the state of arkansas was amended in the general election of 2008 to repeal a provisionials .
some authors use " idiot " characters in novels , plays and poetry .
often these characters are used to highlight or indicate something elsedilly .
examples of such usage are william faulkner 's " the sound and the fury " , daphne du maurier 's " rebecca " and william wordsworth 's " the idiot boy " .
idiot characters in literature are often confused with either mad or lunatic characters .
the most common use of mental impairment is in edmund 's " king lear " .
in fyodor dostoevsky 's novel " the idiot " , the title refers to the central character prince myshkin , a man whose innocence , kindness and humility , combined with his occasional epileptic symptoms , cause many in the corrupt , egoistic culture around him to assume that he lacks intelligence .
in " the antichrist " , nietzsche applies the word ' idiot ' to jesus in a similar fashion , almost certainly in a allusion to dostoevsky 's use of the word : " one has to regret that no dostoevsky lived in the neighbourhood of this most interesting " decadent " ; i mean someone who could feel the fascination of the sick and the childishness of such a combination of the sick and the childishness of the sick " .
