ipculus ip ) is the protocol in the internet protocol suite for relaying data across network boundaries .
it also defines addressing methods that are used to label the datagram with source and destination information .
the internet protocol suite is often referred to as tcp / ip .
the first major version of ip , internet protocol version 4icative ipv4script , is the dominant protocol of the internet .
the internet protocol is responsible for addressing host interfaces , encapsulating data into datagrams .
the internet protocol defines the format of packets and provides an addressing system .
the header includes source ip address , destination ip address , and other datagrams .
the address space is divided into subnetworks , with the designation of network prefixes .
routers communicate with one another via specially designed routing protocols , either inside gateway protocols or exterior gateway protocols , as needed for the topology of the network .
a big part of this model was the " transmission control program " that was made up of both connection-oriented links and datagram services between hosts .
the model became known as the " department of defense temeraire dod dq internet model " and " internet protocol suite " , and informally as " tcp / ip " .
ip versions 0 to 3 were experimental versions , used between 1977 and 1979 .
the dominant internetworking protocol in the internet layer in use today is ipv4 ; the number 4 is the protocol version number carried in every ip datagram .
it was used by the internet stream protocol .
ipv6 was a result of several years of experimentation and dialog .
its most common difference is version 4 .
while ipv4 uses 32 bits for addressing , yielding c . 4.3 billion addresses , ipv6 uses 128-bit addresses providing ca .
however , all united states government systems have demonstrated basic infrastructure support for ipv6 .
the assignment of the new protocol as ipv6 was unknown until due diligence revealed that ipv6 had not yet been used previously .
the design of the internet protocol suite is based on the end-to-end principle , a concept adapted from the cyclades project .
no central monitoring or performance measurement facility exists that tracks or maintains the state of the network .
for the benefit of reducing network complexity , the intelligence in the network is purposely located in the end nodes .
as a consequence of this design , the internet protocol only provides best-effort delivery and its service is unreliable .
because routing is a dynamic , meaning every packet is treated independently , and because the network keeps no state based on the path of prior packets , different packets may be routed to the same destination via different paths , resulting in out-of-order delivery to the receiver .
all error conditions in the network must be detected and compensated by the participating end nodes .
for example , a host may buffer network data to ensure correct ordering before the data is delivered to an application .
routing node will end up packets that fail a header checksum test .
the internet control message protocol is not required to tell the other part of the network .
ipv6 , by contrast , operates without header checksums , since current link layer technology is assumed to provide sufficient error detection .
the dynamic nature of the internet and the diversity of its components provide no guarantee that any particular path is actually capable of , or suitable for , performing the data transmission requested .
facilities exist to examine the maximum transmission unitability of the local link and path mtu discovery can be used for the entire path to the destination .
an ipv6 network does not perform fragmentation or reassembly , and requires end stations and higher-layer protocols to avoid the network 's mtu .
the transmission control protocol is an example of a protocol that adjusts its segment size to be smaller than the mtu .
during the design phase of the arpanet and the early internet , the security aspects and needs of a public , international network could not be predicted .