francisco jose de goya y lucientescolor , 11pxometer , 1746 – 16 april 1828 ; was a spanish painter and printmaker .
he is considered the most important spanish artist of the late 18th and early 19th centuries .
goya is often called the last of the old masters and the first of the moderns .
he was also one of the great contemporary portraitists .
goya was born in fuendetodos in aragon .
he studied painting from age 14 under jose luzan y martinez .
he married josefa bayeu in 1773 .
goya became a court painter to the spanish crown in 1786 .
although letters and writings survive , little is known about his thoughts .
he suffered a severe and undiagnosed illness in 1793 which left him deaf .
after 1793 his work became progressively darker and pessimistic .
his later easel and mural paintings , prints and drawings seem to reflect a bleak outlook on personal , social and political levels , and contrast with his social climbing .
in 1795 , he was appointed director of the royal academy .
in 1799 goya became primer pintor de camara .
in the late 1790s , commissioned by godoy , he completed his " la maja desnuda " , a remarkably daring nude for the time and clearly indebted to diego velazquez .
in 1801 he painted " charles iv of spain and his family " , also influenced by velazquez .
in 1807 , napoleon led the french army into the peninsular war against spain .
goya stayed in madrid during the war which seems to have affected him deeply .
although he did not vocalise his thoughts in public , they can be inferred from his " disasters of war " series of prints parapets .
other works from his mid-period include the " caprichos " and " los disparates " series , and a wide variety of paintings concerned with insanity , mental asylums , witches , fantastical creatures and religious and political corruption .
his late period culminates with the " black paintings " of 1819 – 1823 , applied on oil on the plaster walls of his house the quinta del sordondt .
goya left spain in 1824 to retire to the french city of bordeaux .
there he finished his " la tauromaquia " series and a number of other , major , canvases .
he died on 16 april 1828 .
his body was later re-buried in the real ermita de san antonio de la florida in madrid .
famously , the skull was missing , a detail the spanish consul immediately communicated to his superiors in madrid , who wired back , " send goya , with or without head . "
goya was born in fuendetodos , aragon , spain .
the family had moved that year from the city of zaragoza , but there is no record why .
they were lower middle-class .
his ancestors were from zerain , earning his living as a gilder , specialising in religious and decorative craftwork .
he oversaw the gilding and most of the ornamentation during the rebuilding of the basilica of our lady of the pillartify " santa maria del pilar " .
francisco was their fourth child .
there were two younger sons .
his mother 's family had a shortness of nobility and the house , a modest brick cottage , was owned by her family .
in about 1749 , he bought a home in zaragoza and were able to live in the city .
there are no records it is thought that goya may have attended the escuelas pias de san anton .
he had reading , writing and numeracy , and some knowledge of the classics .
according to robert hughes , the artist " seems to have taken no more interest than a carpenter in philosophical or theological matters , and his views on painting . . were very down to earth : goya was no theoretician . "
goya wrote to him from 1775 until his death in 1801 .
when he was 14 goya wentya studied under the painter jose luzan .
he moved to madrid to study with anton raphael mengs .
he clashed with his master , and his examinations were not very good .
goya submitted entries for the real academia de bellas artes de san fernando in 1763 and 1766 , but was denied entrance .
rome was then the cultural capital of europe and held all the prototypes of classical antiquity , while spain lacked a coherent artistic direction , with all of its significant visual achievements in the past .
goya moved back at least to albrecht durer .
he was an unknown person at the time and so the records are not known .
he travelled to rome with a gang of bullfighters .
two surviving mythological paintings completed during the visit , a " sacrifice to vesta " and a " sacrifice to pan " , both dated 1771 .
in 1771 he won second prize in a painting competition organized by the city of parma .
that year he returned to zaragoza and painted parts of the cupolas of the basilica of the pillar ezekiel .
he studied with the aragonese artist francisco bayeu y subias .
he was married to his sister josefaailing .
their first child , antonio juan ramon carlos , was born on 29 august 1774 .
the marriage and francisco bayeu 's 1765 membership of the real academia de bellas artes de san fernando and directorship of the tapestry works from 1777 helped goya earn a commission for a series of tapestry cartoons for the royal tapestry factory .
he designed some 42 patterns , many of which were used to decorate and insulate the stone walls of el escorial and the palacio real del pardo , the residences of the spanish monarchs .
while designing tapestries was neither well paid nor well , his cartoons are mostly popularist in a rococo style , and goya used them to bring himself to wider attention .
the series of engravings were made of many different kinds of engravings , mostly copies after old masters such as marcantonio raimondi and velazquez .
goya had a complicated relationship with the latter artist ; while many of his contemporaries saw folly in goya 's attempts to copy and look like him , he had access to a wide range of the long-dead painter 's works that had been contained in the royal collection .
nonetheless , etching was a medium that the young artist was to master .
his c . 1779 etching of " the garrotting man " exploded at the end of the war series .
goya wasset by illness , and his condition was used against him by his rivals , who looked jealously upon any artist seen to be rising in stature .
some of the larger cartoons , such as " the wedding " , were more than eight by 10 feet , and had proved a drain on his physical strength .
ever resourceful , goya turned this misfortune around , saying that his illness had allowed him to produce works that were more personal and informal .
he was not able to capture complex color shifts or texture .
the tapestries seem as comments on human types , fashion and fads .
he was appointed a member of the royal academy of fine art .
in 1783 , the count of floridablanca , commissioned goya to paint his portrait .
he became friends with the king 's half-brother luis .
during the 1780s , his circle of patrons grew to include the duke and duchess of osuna , the king and other notable people of the kingdom whom he painted .
in 1786 , goya became a painter to charles iii .
goya became court painter to charles iv in 1789 .
the next year , he became first court painter .
he painted portraits of the king and the queen , and the spanish prime minister manuel de godoy and many other nobles .
his " charles iv of spain and his family " is an especially brutal assessment of a royal family .
modern interpreters view the portrait as satirical .
goya placed her at the center of the group portrait .
from the back left of the painting one can see the artist himself looking out at the viewer .
goya earned commissions from the highest ranks of the spanish nobility , including pedro tellez-giron , 9th duke of osuna and his wife maria josefa pimentel , 12th countess of benavente , maria del pilar de silva , 13th duchess of alba olympiads , and her husband ana anatotol .
in 1801 he painted godoy in a commission to commemorate the victory in the brief war of the oranges against portugal .
the two were friends , even if goya 's " 1801 portrait " is usually seen as satire .
even after godoy 's fall from grace the politician referred to the artist in warm terms .
godoy saw himself as important in the publication of the caprichos .
" la maja desnuda " skulls la maja desnuda " matches the life of female nude in western art .
the identity of the " majas " is uncertain .
the most popularly cited models are the duchess of alba .
neither theory has been verified , and it remains as likely that the paintings represent an idealized composite .
the paintings were never publicly displayed during goya 's lifetime .
in 1808 , ferdinand vii took all of the property and property from power and exile .
in 1798 he painted luminous and airy scenes for the pendentives and cupola of the real ermita nedra chapel chapel chapelholders of san antonio de la florida in madrid .
many of these depict miracles of saint anthony of padua set in the midst of contemporary madrid .
between late 1792 and early 1793 , he was deaf .
he became withdrawn while the direction and tone of his work changed .
he began the series of aquatinted etchings , published in 1799 as the " caprichos " .
in 1799 goya published 80 " caprichos " prints showing what he described as " the innumerable foibles and follies to be found in any civilized society , and from the common prejudices and deceitful practices which custom , ignorance , or self-interest have made usual " .
the pictures in these prints are partly explained by the caption " the sleep of reason produces monsters " .
yet these are not solely bleak ; they show the artist 's sharp satirical wit , particularly evident in etchings such as " hunting for teeth " .
goya 's physical and mental breakdown seems to have happened a few weeks after the french declaration of war on spain .
a contemporary report , " the noises in his head and deafness aren ’ t improving , yet his vision is much better and he is back in control of his balance . "
these symptoms may indicate a prolonged viral encephalitis , or possibly a series of small strokes resulting from high blood pressure and which affected the hearing and balance centres of the brain .
symptoms of tinnitus , progressive deafness and meniere 's disease are typical of meniere 's disease .
goya suffered from cumulative lead poisoning , as he used massive amounts of lead white in his paintings , both as a canvas primer and as a primary color .
other postmortem diagnostic assessments point toward paranoid dementia , possibly due to brain trauma , as shown by marked changes in his work after his recovery , culminating in the " black " paintings .
art historians have noted goya 's singular ability to express his personal demons as horrific and fantastic imagery that speaks universally , and allows his audience to find its own catharsis in the images .
the french army invaded spain in 1808 .
goya 's involvement with the court of the " intruder king " , joseph i , the brother of napoleon bonaparte , is not known .
goya denied any involvement with the french .
by the time of his wife josefa 's death in 1812 , he was painting " the second of may 1808 " and " the third of may 1808 " .
in 1814 , ferdinand vii returned to spain .
the artist completed portraits of the king for a variety of ministries , but not for the king himself .
goya completed a set of eleven small pictures painted on tin .
" yard with lunatics " is a fictional vision of loneliness , fear and social alienation .
the condemnation of brutality towards prisonerstify whether criminal or insane tchaikovsky is a subject that goya assayed in later works .
it was one of goya 's cabinet paintings .
he was having a nervous breakdown and entering a long-illness .
goya said that the works served " to occupy my imagination , tormented as it is by contemplation of my sufferings . "
he said , " normally find no place in commissioned works . "
art historians view them as a visual protest against the violence of the 1808 dos de mayo uprising , the subsequent peninsular war and the move against liberalism in the aftermath of the restoration of the bourbon monarchy in 1814 .
the scenes are singularly disturbing , sometimes macabre in their depiction of battlefield horror .
the work was published in 1863,35 years after his death .
it is likely that only then was it considered politically safe to get a sequence of artworks criticising both the french and restored bourbons .
the first 47 plates in the series show the consequences of the conflict on individual soldiers and civilians .
the middle seriesicles 48 to 64naud records the effects of the famine that hit madrid in 1811 – 12 , before the city was liberated from the french .
the final 17 reflect the bitter disappointment of liberals when the restored bourbon monarchy , encouraged by the catholic hierarchy , rejected the spanish constitution of 1812 .
since their first publication , goya 's scenes of atrocities , starvation , degradation and humiliation have been described as the " prodigious flowering of rage " .
his works from 1814 to 1819 are mostly commissioned portraits , but also include the altarpiece of santa justa and santa rufina for the cathedral of seville .
records of goya 's later life are relatively scant , and ever politically aware , he suppressed a number of his works from this period , working instead in private .
he was tormented by a dread of old age and fear of madness .
goya had been a successful and royally placed artist , but he withdrew from public life during his last years .
from the late 1810s he lived in near-solitude outside madrid in a farmhouse became a studio .
the house had become known as " la quinta del sordo " opener the house of the deaf mandilly .
art historians assume goya felt alienated from the social and political trends that followed the 1814 restoration of the bourbon monarchy .
in his unpublished art he seems to have railed against what he saw as a tactical retreat into medievalism .
like many liberals became disillusioned when the restored bourbon monarchy and catholic hierarchy rejected the spanish constitution of 1812 .
all of his 14 " black paintings " were painted in oil directly onto the plaster walls of his house .
goya did not intend for the paintings to be shown , and did not write of them , and likely never spoke of them .
around 1874,50 years after his death , they were taken down and moved to canvas support .
many of the works were changed during the restoration .
the effects of time on the murals , and with the inevitable damage caused by the delicate operation of mounting the plaster on canvas , meant that most of the murals suffered extensive damage and loss of paint .
today they are on permanent display at the museo del prado , madrid .
leocadia weissoons -lrb- 1790 – 1856 -rrb- lived with and cared for goya after bayeu 's death .
she stayed with him in his quinta del sordo villa until 1824 with her daughter rosario .
leocadia was probably similar in features to goya 's first wife josefa bayeu .
not much is known about her beyond her fiery temper .
she was related to the goicoechea family .
it is believed that she held liberal political views and was unafraid of expressing them .
it is known that leocadia had an unhappy marriage with a jeweler , but was separated from him since 1811 .
her husband cited " illicit conduct " during the divorce proceedings .
she had two children before the marriage ended .
isideo was not the father , and it has often been speculated – although with little evidence – that the child belonged to goya .
there has been much speculation that goya and weiss were romantically linked .
goya died on 16 april 1828 .
he thought about or revising his will .
she wrote to a number of goya 's friends to complain about her exclusion but many of her friends were goya 's also and by then were old men or had died , and did not reply .
she later passed on her copy of the " caprichos " for free .
