in cryptography , encryption is the way that only one can use the message .
in cryptography , an encryption scheme uses a pseudo-random encryption key that is generated by an algorithm .
it is in principle possible to decrypt the message without having the key , but for a well-designed encryption scheme , considerable computational resources and skills are required .
an example of a symmetric key is the german military 's enigma machine .
when the allies found out how the machine worked , they were able to decipher the information coded within the messages as soon as they could discover the encryption key for a given day 's transmissions .
in public-key encryption schemes , the encryption key is published for anyone to use and encrypt messages .
only the receiving party can use the decryption key that allows messages to be read .
public-key encryption was first described in a secret document in 1973 .
the work of diffie and hellman was published in a journal with a large readership .
for example , the computer security institute reported that in 2007,71 % of companies surveyed utilized encryption for some of their data in transit , and 53 % utilized encryption for some of their data in storage .
encryption can be used to protect data " at rest " , such as information stored on computers and storage devices .
in recent years , there have been numerous reports of confidential data , such as customers ' personal records , being exposed through loss or theft of laptops or backup drives .
digital rights management systems , which prevent unauthorized use or reproduction of copyrighted material and protect software against reverse engineeringocation , is another somewhat different example of using encryption on data at rest .
encryption is also used to protect data in transit , such as networks overboard , mobile telephones , wireless microphones , bluetooth devices and bank automatic teller machines .
data should also be encrypted when transmitted across networks in order to protect against eavesdropping of network traffic by unauthorized users .
an example implementation of this method can be found on ios devices , where the cryptographic key is kept in a dedicated effaceable storage ' .
because the key is stored on the same device , this setup on its own does not offer full confidentiality protection in case an unauthorized person gains physical access to the device .
encryption is an important tool but is not enough to ensure the security or privacy of sensitive information throughout its lifetime .
data fragmentation and active defense data protection technologies try to counter some of these attacks by distributing , moving , or mutating ciphertext so it is more difficult to identify , steal , corrupt , or destroy .
encryption , by itself , can protect the confidentiality of messages , but other techniques are still needed to protect the integrity and authenticity of a message .
integrity protection mechanisms such as macs and digital signatures must be applied to the ciphertext when it is first created , typically on the same device used to compose the message , to protect a message end-to-end along its full transmission path ; otherwise , any node between the sender and the encryption agent could potentially tamper with it .
encrypting at the time of creation is only secure if the encryption device itself has correct keys and has not been tampered with .
if an endpoint device has been configured to trust a root certificate that an attacker controls , for example , the attacker can both inspect and tamper with encrypted data by performing a man-in-the-middle attack anywhere along the message 's path .
the common practice of tls interception by network operators is a controlled and institutionally sanctioned form of such an attack , but countries have also attempted to employ such attacks as a form of censorship .
even when encryption correctly hides a message 's content and it ɔs with at rest or in transit , a message 's " length " is a form of metadata that can still leak sensitive information about the message .
the well-known crime and breach attacks against https were side-channel attacks that relied on information leakage via the length of encrypted content , for example .
padding a message 's payload before encrypting it can help the cleartext 's true length , at a cost of increasing the ciphertext 's size and introducing bandwidth overhead .
encrypting and padding messages to form padded uniform random blobs or purbs is a practice guaranteeing that the cipher text leaks no metadata about its cleartext 's content , and leaks asymptotically minimal formula _ 1 information via its length .