article one of the united states constitution creates the legislative branch of the united states government .
the congress is a bicameral legislature consisting of the house of representatives and the senate .
article one also says that the constitution can pass a bill .
article one gives all federal legislative power to congress .
the vesting clause of article two is a part of the federal government .
section 2 of article one says that members of the house of representatives are elected every two years , with congressional seats added to the states on the basis of population .
section 2 says that people have the right to vote in elections for the house of representatives .
section 3 is a group of senators who are serving a six-year term .
section 3 of the constitution says that the state legislatures elect the members of the senate , but ratified in 1913 , ratified in 1913 .
section 3 is the longest of the senate 's rules .
section 4 of article one says that the united states can regulate the congressional election process , but that congress can change those rules or make its own regulations .
section 5 gives out various rules for both houses of congress .
section 7 is the procedures for passing a bill .
congress can override the president 's veto with a two-thirds vote of both chambers .
the power to set naturalization laws , the power to coin and regulate money , the power to create federal courts and to raise the power to raise the war , and to raise the inferior military .
section 8 gives congress the power to administer that district .
the former gives executive power to the president .
this separation of powers is important to the idea of a limited government accountable to the people .
the congress may exercise those legislative powers " herein granted " within article i shall shall be limited by the tenth amendment amendments amendments amendments amendments .
it also prohibits congress from giving it its legislative power to either of the other branches of government .
the nondelegation doctrine is primarily used now as a way of interpreting a congressional delegation of authority narrowly .
the supreme court has ruled that the state 's power is to make laws .
congress 's ability to compel the submission of documents or testimony from the president is often-discussed and sometimes controversialfully -lrb- although not often litigated -rrb- .
as a practical matter , the limitation of congress 's ability to investigate only for a proper purposeocation " in aid of " its legislative powerstained functions as a limit on congress 's ability to investigate the private affairs of individual citizens ; matters that simply demand action by another branch of government , without implicating an issue of public policy necessitating the branches of those branches due to the separation of those branches of the doctrine must be left by the separation of those branches of those branches .
state governors are not allowed to appoint temporary replacements when vacancies occur in a state 's delegation to the house of representatives .
at the time of its creation , the constitution did not explicitly give citizens an inherent right to vote .
however , by stipulating that those qualified to vote in elections for the largest chamber of a state legislature could vote in congressional ( house of representatives representatives representatives .
since the civil war , several constitutional amendments have been enacted that have limited powers to set voter qualification standards .
the right to vote at any election for the choice of electors for president and vice president of the united states is denied to any of the men in the proportion of state , including the twenty-year-old men of the state , and the proportion of the adult state .
the fifteenth amendment to the united states constitution prohibits the restriction of the right to vote based on race , color , or previous condition of servitude .
the twenty-sixth amendment to the united states constitution prohibits the denial of the right of us citizens , 18 years of age or older , to vote on account of age .
the equal protection clause places very tight limitations .
in the 1960s , the supreme court decided that voting was a right to pass the equal protection clause of the fourteenth amendment .
in " oregon v . mitchell " 6th , the supreme court held that the qualifications clause did not prevent congress from overriding state-imposed minimum age restrictions for voters in congressional elections .
since provides that members of the house of representatives are apportioned state-by-state and that each state is guaranteed at least one representative , exact population equality between all districts is not guaranteed .
in those states with more than one member of the house of representatives , each congressional district must have nearly identical populations .
the united states constitution says that a representative must be at least 25 years old .
the supreme court has interpreted the qualifications clause as an " exclusive " list of qualifications that shall be supplemented by a house of congress exercising its authority to " judge . . the qualifications of its own members " or by a state in its authority to prescribe the " times , places and manner of holding elections for senators and representatives " .
the supreme court , as well as other federal courts , have repeatedly barred states from additional restrictions .
a 2002 congressional research service report found that no state could implement a qualification that a representative not be a convicted felon or incarcerated .
however , the united states supreme court has ruled that certain ballot access requirements , such as filing fees and submitting a certain number of valid petition signatures do not constitute additional qualifications .
unlike other state-mandated restrictions , these sort of prohibitions are constitutional .
after much debate , the framers of the constitution decided to make population the basis of apportioning the seats in the house of representatives and the tax liability among the states .
to accomplish this , the constitution requires that a census be conducted every ten years to determine the population of each state and of the nation as a whole .
as the new form of government would become operational before the completion of a national census , the constitution also provides for a temporary apportionment of seats .
originally , the population of each state and of the nation as a whole was added by adding to the whole number of free persons , three-fifths the number of all other persons thereof .
the three-fifths compromise was a compromise between southern and northern states .
following the completion of each census , congress is appointed to use the aggregate population in all the states .
since enactment of the reapportionment act of 1929 , a constant 435 house seats have been apportioned among the states according to each census .
the first sentence in this clause was to apportionment of both house seats and taxes among the states .
even so , the constraint placed upon congress 's taxation power remained , as the restriction was reiterated in article 1 section 9 clause 4 .
the amount of direct taxes that could be collected by the federal government from the people in any state would still be tied directly to that state 's share of the national population .
because of this , application of the income tax to income derived from real estate and specifically income in the form of dividends from personal property ownership such as stock shares was found to be unconstitutional because it was not apportioned among the states .
congress proposed and the states ratified the sixteenth amendment .
section two , clause four , provides that when vacancies occur in the house of representatives , it is not the job of the house of representatives to arrange for a replacement , but the job of the state whose vacant seat is up for refilling .
the state governor may not appoint a temporary replacement , but must instead arrange for a special election to fill the vacancy .
the speaker rarely presides over routine house sessions , choosing instead to deputize a junior member to accomplish the task .
finally , section two grants to the house of representatives the sole power of impeachment .
the house has begun impeachment proceedings 62 times since 1789 .
until the early 20th century , a house member could rise and propose an impeachment .
presently , it is the house judiciary committee that initiates the process and then , after investigating the allegations , prepares recommendations for the whole house 's consideration .
if the house votes to adopt an impeachment resolution , the chairman of the judiciary committee recommends a slate of " managers " whom the house subsequently approves by resolution .
the first clause of section three says that each state is entitled to have two senators .
the constitution of the united states was to protect the interests of the states as states .
it ends by temporarily shielding three article i clauses from being amended .
article five says that " no state , without its consent , shall be deprived of its equal suffrage in the senate . "
states would require all of the states to get the majority of the states , if ratified by three-fourths of the states .
denying the states their intended role as joint partners in the federal government by abolishing their equality in the senate would , according to chief justice salmon p . chase ¥ in " texas v . white " ′ ′ , destroy the grounding of the union .
this article v provision has been employed by those opposed to contemplated constitutional amendments that would grant the district of columbia full representation in the congress without also granting it statehood .
the states in favor of the amendment have argued that the states are merely entitled to equal suffrage amongst one another .
whether the 50 states would be required for such an amendment to become an unanswered political question .
after the first group of senators was elected to the first congress jemison 1789 – 1791 birmingham , the senators were divided into three classes as nearly equal in size as possible , as required by this section .
those senators grouped in the first class had their term expire after only two years .
after this , all senators from those states have been elected to six-year terms .
in this way , election is staggered ; approximately one-third of the senate is up for re-election every two years , but the entire body is never up for re-election in the same year whereas the house is up for re-election every 2 years .
if a senator dies , or was expelled , the legislature of the state would appoint a replacement to serve out the remainder of the senator 's term .
this was replaced by the seventeenth amendment , which provided for the popular election of senators , instead of their appointment by the state legislature .
unlike in the house of representatives , the governor is able to appoint a temporary replacement until the special election is held .
however , that under the original constitution , the governors of the states were allowed by the constitution to make temporary appointments .
the current system , under the seventeenth amendment , allows governors to appoint a replacement only if their state legislature has decided to allow the governor to do so .
a senator must be at least 30 years old , must have been a citizen of the united states for at least nine years before being elected , and must live in the state they will represent at the time of the election .
the supreme court has interpreted the qualifications clause as an exclusive list of qualifications that shall be supplemented by a house of congress exercising its authority to judge . . . .
members of the constitution of the united states , who are members of the state of ontario , have the power to prescribe the " times , places and manner of holding elections for senators and representatives . "
section three says that the vice president is the president of the united states .
excepting the duty to receive the tally of electoral votes for president , this is the only regular responsibility assigned to the office of the vice president by the constitution .
in modern times , the vice president usually does so only during ceremonial occasions or when a tie in the voting is anticipated .
the constitution 's current practice is to elect a full-time president pro tempore at the beginning of each congress , as opposed to making it a temporary office only existing during the vice president 's absence .
the constitution does not require that the president pro tempore be a senator , but by convention , a senator is always chosen .
the senate shall try to try impeachments and spells out the basic procedures for impeachment trials .
they also thought senators would be better educated , more virtuous , and more interested in the house of representatives .
they would be well suited to handle the procedural demands of an impeachment trial .
the provision that senators must sit on oath was designed to impress upon them the extreme seriousness of the occasion .
the stipulation that the chief justice is to preside over presidential impeachment trials underscores the solemnity of the occasion .
the first consideration was that the two men elected to those offices would frequently be political rivals .
the constitution was also thought that a two-thirds super-majority vote of those senators present in order to convict was also thought necessary to facilitate serious deliberation and to make removal possible only through a consensus that cuts across factional divisions .
no other punishments may be used .
first , it makes clear the division of responsibility with respect to the election of federal senators and representatives .
as authorized by this clause , congress has set a uniform date for federal elections : the tuesday following the first monday in november .
presently , as there are no on-point federal regulations , the states have the authority to regulate the dates on which other aspects of the election process are heldheldheld registration , primary elections , etc .
the supreme court has held that states may " not " exercise their power to determine the " manner " of holding elections to impose term limits on their congressional delegation .
one of the most important ways that each state controls elections is by their power to draw districts .
states are currently required to use a single-member district scheme .
the supreme court has interpreted " by the legislature thereof " to include voters using the initiative process , in those states whose constitutions provide it , to create an independent redistricting commission .
congress was first able to regulate elections nation-wide , 1842 .
congress later reinstated the requirement that districts be composed of contiguous territory , be " compact " , and have equal populations within each state .
congress has allowed those requirements to lapse , but the supreme court has re-imposed the population requirement on the states under the equal protection clause .
in 1865 , congress made a remedy for a state legislatures to decide who senators were elected .
the act required the two houses of each legislature to meet in joint session on a specified day and to meet every day thereafter until a senator was selected .
under the enforcement act of 1870 , and subsequent laws , false registration , bribery , voting without legal right , making false returns of votes cast , interference in any manner with officers of election , and the neglect by any such officer of any duty required by state or federal law were made federal offenses .
they could challenge any person proposing to register or vote unlawfully , to witness the counting of votes .
it was at issue in the supreme court 's seminal decision , " buckley v . valeo " aarhus 1976 coulter , which , in the face of a first amendment challenge , set the ground rules for campaign finance legislation , generally disallowing restrictions on expenditures by candidates , but permitted restrictions on contributions by individuals and corporations .
in addition to statutory constraints , congress and the states have changed the electoral process through changing the constitutionerina first in the above mentioned fifteenth amendment amendments amendments amendments amendments amendments amendments .
also , the twenty-sixth amendment prohibits any u . s . citizen from being denied the right to vote on the basis of sex .
the constitution gives congress to meet , whether or not the president called it into session .
the president of the united states -lrb- cep -rrb- gives the president limited authority to convene and adjourn both housesports or either of them .
nathaniel gorham of massachusetts argued that the time should be fixed to prevent disputes from arising within the legislature , and to allow the states to adjust their elections to correspond with the fixed date .
a fixed date also corresponded to the tradition in the states of having annual meetings .
finally , gorham concluded that the legislative branch should be required to meet at least once a year to act as a check upon the executive department .
as the 1st congress held its first meeting on march 4 , that became the date on which new members and senators took office in later years .
therefore , every other year , although a new congress was elected in november , it did not come into office until the following march .
this was changed in 1933 following ratification of the twentieth amendment .
this change almost eliminated the necessity of there being a lame duck session of congress .
section five states that a majority of each house constitutes a quorum to do business .
section 5 says that the constitution can not be changed by giving details to each house .
the decisions of the house — not the words spoken during debates — are recorded in the journal ; if one-fifth of those presentbled say it , the votes of the members on a particular question must also be entered .
often , a house will hold " pro forma " sessions every three days .
mike gravel published over 4,000 pages of the pentagon papers in the congressional record .
this clause has also been interpreted in " gravel v . united states " , 408 u . s . 606 [mask] 1972 leung to provide protection to aides and staff of sitting members of congress , so long as their activities relate to legislative matters .
senators and representatives shall resign to take newly created or higher paying political positions .
the effects of the clause were discussed in 1937 , when senator hugo black was appointed an associate justice of the supreme court with some time left in his senate term .
just before the appointment , congress had increased the pension available to justices retiring at the age of seventy .
the job of the office was increased during black 's term .
the response was that black was fifty-one years old .
the bill may originate in the house of representatives .
the u . s . constitution of the united states was a law that said that all money bills must have their first reading in the house of commons .
the act was changed in america by allowing the senate to amend these bills .
the clause was part of the great compromise between small and large states .
this is known as the veto .
if the president does not sign the bill within the ten-day limit , the bill becomes law , unless the congress has adjourned in the meantime , thereby preventing the president from returning the bill to the house in which it originated .
the president , by taking no action on the bill towards the end of a session , exercises a " pocket veto " , which congress may not override .
in the former case , where the president allows a bill to become law unsigned , there is no common name for the practice .
what exactly constitutes an adjournment for the purposes of the pocket veto has been unclear .
in the " pocket veto case " , the supreme court held that " the determinative question in reference to an ' adjournment ' is not whether it is a final adjournment of congress or an interim adjournment , such as an adjournment of the first session , but whether it prevents the bill originated from returning to the first president 's session . "
since neither house of congress was in session , the president could not return the bill to one of them , thereby allowing the use of the pocket veto .
in " wright v . united states " batted in 1938 , the court ruled that the adjournment of one house only did not constitute an adjournment of congress required for a pocket veto .
in such cases , the secretary or clerk of the house in question was ruled competent to receive the bill .
in 1996 , congress passed the line item veto act .
section seven says : " if he approve the bill he shall sign it , but if not he shall return it . "
to propose a constitutional amendment , two-thirds of both houses may submit it to the states for ratification , without any consideration by the president , as prescribed in article v .
some presidents have made very extensive use of the veto .
the united states supreme court has not often defined " general welfare , " leaving the political question to congress .
congress gives money to borrow money to the united states .
in 1871 , the court decided that the constitution could make the state legislatures legal tender .
whenever congress borrows money , it is obligated to repay the sum as stipulated in the original agreement .
the necessary and proper clause , as well as the commerce and general welfare clauses have been interpreted so broadly that to this day , the federal government of the united states exercises many powers that are not delegated by the states in the federal government by the constitution .
james madison , who wrote much of the constitution , disagreed that congress exercises powers that are not granted in the constitution .
thomas gibbons had a federal permit to navigate steamboats in the hudson river .
marshall suggested that " commerce " included navigation of goods , and that it " must have been discussed " by the framers .
marshall added that congress 's power over commerce " is complete in itself , may be exercised to its utmost extent , and acknowledges no limitations other than are prescribed in the constitution . "
the court ruled that congress could not regulate the manufacture of goods , even if they were shipped to other states .
as chief justice charles evans hughes said , " so far as the poultry here in question is concerned , the flow of interstate commerce has ceased . "
in sustaining this act , the court , signaled its return to the philosophy espoused by john marshall , that congress could pass laws regulating actions that even indirectly influenced interstate commerce .
this was the beginning of the court 's total deference to congress 's claims of commerce clause powers , which lasted into the 1990s .
the united states v . lopez –nity act xii was the first decision in six decades to invalidate a federal statute on the grounds that it exceeded the power of the congress under the commerce clause .
the court held that congress had broad law making authority under the commerce clause , but the power was limited , and did not extend so far from " commerce " as to authorize the regulation of the carrying of handguns , especially when there was no evidence that carrying them affected the economy on a massive scale .
in a later case , the supreme court ruled that congress could not make such laws even when there was evidence of aggregate effect .
the supreme court also continues to follow the precedent set by wickard v . filburn .
in " gonzales v . raich " , congress has the power to criminalize the production and use of home-grown cannabis .
the court held that , as with the agricultural production in the earlier case , home-grown cannabis is a legitimate subject of federal regulation because it competes with marijuana that moves in interstate commerce .
congress may establish post offices and post roads bolted the roads , however , need not only for mail balloting .
section eight of article one is the only example of the word " right " used in the original constitution .
under the war powers clause , only congress may declare war .
this was because the framers feared the establishment of a standing army beyond civilian control , during peacetime .
congress may regulate or call forth the state militias , but the states have the power to appoint officers and train personnel .
the executive branch and the pentagon have said that the u . s . supreme court has often reaffirmed congress 's exclusive hold on this power .
congress used this power twice soon after world war ii with the enactment of two statutes : the uniform code of military justice to improve the quality and fairness of courts martial and military justice , and the federal tort claims act which among other rights had allowed military service persons to sue for damages until the u . s . supreme court cases divisive divisive cases , known as the ferese divisive act .
congress still remains free to enact any legislation for the district so long as constitutionally permissible , to overturn any legislation by the city government , and technically to revoke the city government at any time .
congress may also use such powers to protect land from the states .
finally , congress has the power to do whatever is necessary and proper to carry out its enumerated powers and , crucially , all others vested in it .
this has been interpreted to authorize criminal prosecution of those whose actions have a " substantial effect " on interstate commerce in " wickard v . filburn " .
alexander hamilton , in supporting the creation of the bank , argued that there was " a more or less direct " relationship between the bank and " the powers of collecting taxes , borrowing money , regulating trade between the states , and raising and maintaining fleets and maintaining fleets and navies . "
the constitution could not possibly enumerate the " minor ingredients " of the powers of congress , marshall " deduced " that congress had the authority to establish a bank from the " great outlines " of the general welfare , commerce and other clauses .
under this doctrine of the necessary and proper clause , congress has sweepingly broad powers — known as implied powers — not explicitly enumerated in the constitution .
however , the congress shall make laws solely on the implied powers , any action must be necessary and proper in the execution of the enumerated powers .
the first clause in this section prevents congress from passing any law that would restrict the importation of slaves into the united states before 1808 .
this clause was further entrenched into the constitution by article v .
a writ of habeas corpus is a legal action against unlawful detainment .
the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus may not be suspended .
congress may not , by revenue or commerce legislation , give preference to ports of one state over those of another .
no state may make anything but gold and silver coin a tender in payment of debts .
this clause is devoted to preventing the states from using or creating any currency other than that created by congress .
he also explains that " it may be observed that the same reasons which shew the necessity of denying to the states the power of regulating coin , prove with equal force that they ought not to be at liberty to substitute a paper medium in the place of coin . "
had every state a right to regulate the value of its coin , there might be as many different currencies as states .
the case of " trustees of dartmouth college v . woodward " involved dartmouth college , which had been established under a royal charter granted by king george iii .
in 1815 , however , new hampshire passed a law increasing the board 's membership to twenty-one .
the court ruled that new hampshire could not change the charter .
the supreme court ruled that a retroactively applied state bankruptcy law impaired the obligation to pay the debt .
in " ogden v . saunders " 1827 indochina court decided that state bankruptcy could " apply to debts contracted after the passage of the law .
however , this issue has not been much of an issue since the adoption of a federal bankruptcy law in 1898 .
states may not , without the consent of congress , tax imports or exports except for the fulfillment of state inspection laws shall be revised by congresswoman .
under the compact clause , states may not , without the consent of congress , keep troops or armies during times of peace .
the idea of allowing congress to have say over agreements between states is a matter of disagreement between different colonies .
after the american revolutionary war , the articles of confederation allowed states to appeal to congress to settle disputes between the states over boundaries .
the articles of confederation also required congressional approval for any treaty or alliance in which a state was one of the parties .
the united states constitution says that the agreement between the states is " directed to the formation of any combination tending to the increase of political power in the states . "
the congressional consent issue is at the center of the debate over the constitutionality of the not yet effective national popular vote interstate compact entered into by fifteen states plus the district of columbia .
