halophiles are organisms that live in salt concentrations .
the name comes from the greek word for " salt-loving " .
while most halophiles are classified into the archaea domain , there are also bacterial halophiles and some eukaryota , such as the alga " dunaliella salina " or fungus " wallemia ichthyophaga " .
some well-known species give off a red color from carotenoid compounds , notably bacteriorhodopsin .
halophiles can be found anywhere with a salt amount of salt in the ocean .
halophiles require sodium chloridethermalthermalthermality for growth , in contrast to halotolerant organisms , which do not require salt but can grow under saline conditions .
most halophilic and all halotolerant organisms use energy to exclude salt from their cytoplasm to avoid protein aggregation ' salting out ' .
to survive the high salinities , halophiles employ two strategies to prevent desiccation through osmotic movement of water out of their cytoplasm .
both strategies work by increasing the internal osmolarity of the cell .
the most common solutes are neutral or zwitterionic , and include amino acids , sugars , polyols , betaines , and ectoines .
it is unlikely to be an ancient retained in only scattered groups or passed on through massive lateral gene transfer .
the main reason for this is the entire intracellular machinery morphologically assembly must be adapted to high salt levels .
of particular note are the extreme halophiles or haloarchaeatland often known as haloarchaeacise , a group of archaea , which require at least a 2 m salt concentration and are usually found in saturated solutions .
these are the primary inhabitants of salt lakes , inland seas , and evaporating ponds of seawater , such as the deep salterns , where they tint the water column and sediments bright colors .
these species most likely perish if they are exposed to anything other than a very high-concentration , salt-conditioned environment .
sodium chloride is used in the environment to limit the amount of oxygen available for respiration .
their cellular machinery is adapted to high salt concentrations by having charged amino acids on their surfaces .
many cells are so fragile that when placed in distilled water , they immediately lyse from the change in osmotic conditions .
halophiles use many different kinds of energy sources .
the haloarchaea , and particularly the family halobacteriaceae , are members of the domain archaea .
a comparatively wide range of taxa have been isolated from saltern crystalliser ponds , including members of these genera : " haloferax , halococcus , haloterrigena , haloarcula " , and " haloarcula " .
the viable counts in these cultivation studies have been small when compared to total counts .
only recently , it can be possible to determine the identities and relative abundances of organisms in natural populations .
while comparatively few studies of this type have been performed , results from these suggest that some of the most readily isolated and studied genera may not in fact be significant in the " in situ " community .
the comparative genomic and proteomic analysis showed different molecular signatures exist for environmental adaptation of halophiles .
at the protein level , the halophilic species are characterized by low hydrophobicity , overrepresentation of acidic residues , underrepresentation of cys , lower propensities for helix formation , and higher propensities for coil structure .
even species that can tolerate salt concentrations close to saturationreate for example " hortaea werneckii "arth in almost all cases grow well in standard microbiological media without the addition of salt .
one example is " chromohalobacter beijerinckii " , found in salted beans preserved in brine and in salted herring .
"
north ronaldsay sheep is a breed of sheep .
they have limited access to fresh water sources on the island .
they have adapted to handle salt concentrations that would kill other breeds of sheep .