it was from 1641 to 1854 .
dejima was a small fan-shaped artificial island in the bay of nagasaki .
it was built in 1634 .
the dutch were moved to dejima in 1641 .
the island was later integrated into nagasaki city through land reclamation .
in 1922 , the " dejima dutch trading post " was made a japanese national historic site .
in 1543 , the history of contact between japan and europe began with the portuguese merchants on tanegashima .
six years later jesuit missionary francis xavier came to the island of kyushu .
at first portuguese traders were based in hirado , but they moved in search of a better port .
in 1570 " daimyo " omura sumitada changed to catholicism .
in 1580 sumitada gave the jurisdiction of nagasaki to the jesuits .
shogun iemitsu ordered the creation of the artificial island in 1634 .
this was one of the many edicts put forth by iemitsu between 1633 and 1639 .
the tokugawa government decided to expel the portuguese in 1639 .
since 1609 , the dutch had a trading post on the island of hirado .
the left of the portuguese left the dutch employees of the " vereenigde oostindische compagnie " clito " ono as the only westerners with trade access to japan .
for 33 years they were allowed to trade freely .
at its maximum the hirado trading post covered a large area .
in 1637 and 1639 , the warehouses were built in the hirado trading post .
christian-era dates were used on the stonework of the new warehouses .
without the yearly portuguese ships from macau , the economy of nagasaki suffered heavily .
government officials made the dutch move from hirado to dejima in nagasaki .
from 1641 on , only chinese and dutch ships were allowed to come to japan .
the island of dejima was part of the city of nagasaki .
25 local japanese families who owned the land received an annual rent from the dutch .
it was linked to the mainland by a small bridge , guarded on both sides , and with a gate on the dutch side .
it had houses for about twenty dutchmen , warehouses , and accommodation for japanese officials .
the dutch were watched by a number of japanese officials , gatekeepers , night watchmen , and a supervisorciful " otona " [unk] 名 ashore with about fifty subordinates .
many merchants supplied goods and catering .
they had to pay all the money they paid paid .
as the city of nagasaki , dejima was under direct supervision of edo .
every ship that came to dejima was inspected .
its sails were held by the japanese until they released the ship to leave .
religious books and weapons were taken away .
the dutch were not allowed to hold any religious services on the island .
the trade with japan was very profitable for the dutch .
trade became less in the 18th century , as only two ships per year were allowed to dock at dejima .
after the bankruptcy of the east-india company in 1795 , the dutch government took over the trade with japan .
the batavian republic ɔ was under french napoleonic rule .
for a while , it was the only place in the world where the dutch flag was flown .
the chief dutch official in japan was called the " opperhoofd " by the dutch .
this title did not change when the island 's trading became under dutch state authority .
during these years , the plan was to have one incumbent per year with some flexibility .
the trade was mainly made in silk , cotton , and " materia medica " from china and india .
also , deer pelts and shark skin were transported to japan from taiwan , as well as books , scientific instruments and many other rarities from europe .
the dutch traders bought japanese copper , silver , camphor , porcelain , and rice .
to this was added the personal trade of voc employees on dejima .
they sold more than 10,000 foreign books on various scientific subjects to the japanese from the end of the 18th to the early 19th century .
these became the basis of knowledge and a factor in the rangaku movement or dutch studies .
in all , 606 dutch ships arrived at dejima during its two centuries of settlement , from 1641 to 1847 .
for two hundred years , foreign merchants were generally not allowed to cross from dejima to nagasaki .
the japanese were also banned from entering dejima , except interpreters , cooks , carpenters , clerks and ' women of pleasure ' from the maruyama teahouses .
these were hand-pickedked from 1642 by the japanese , often against their will .
from the 18th century , there were some exceptions to this rule .
a few " oranda yuki " skulls were allowed to stay with the dutch .
once a year the europeans were allowed to attend the festivities at the suwa-shrine .
sometimes physicians such as engelbert kaempfer , carl peter thunberg , and philipp franz von siebold were called to high-ranking japanese patients with the permission of the authorities .
in the 18th century , dejima became known in japan as a center of medicine , military science , and astronomy .
many samurai traveled there for " dutch studies " .
in addition , the " opperhoofd " was treated like the representative of a tributary state .
the dutch delegation traveled to edo yearly between 1660 and 1790 , and once every four years after .
this was denied to the chinese traders .
the long travel to the shogunal court stopped the boredom of the dutch stay , but it was a costly affair .
government officials told them in advance and in detail which richly expensive gifts were expected at the court , such as astrolabes , a pair of glasses , telescopes , medical instruments , medical books , or exotic animals and tropical birds .
in return , the dutch delegation received some gifts from the shogun .
when they arrived in edo , the " opperhoofd " and his retinueference usually had to wait in the " nagasakiya " , their mandatory residence until they were summoned at the court .
during the reign of the shogun tokugawa tsunayoshi , they were expected to perform dutch dances and songs for the amusement of the " shogun " after their official audience .
they also used the opportunity of their stay of about two to three weeks in the capital to exchange knowledge with learned japanese and , under escort , to visit the town .
after the forced opening of japan by commodore perry in 1854 , the bakufu suddenly increased its interactions with dejima .
the nagasaki naval training center gave the city a naval training base , nagasaki kaigun denshugon , to allow maximum interaction with dutch naval know-how .
the center was given the japan 's first steamship , the " kanko maru " , given by the government of the netherlands the same year .
admiral enomoto takeaki was one of the students of the training center .
japan ended the treaty of kanagawa in 1858 .
this ended dejima 's role as japan 's only window on the western world during the era of national isolation .
since then , the island was expanded by reclaimed land and merged into nagasaki .
nagasaki harbor was made bigger in 1904 .
the original footprint of dejima island has been marked by rivets .
dejima today is a work in progress .
the island was made a national historic site in 1922 .
restoration work was started in 1953 .
in 1996 , restoration of dejima began with plans for reconstructing 25 buildings in their early 19th century state .
to better display dejima 's fan-shaped form , the project planned to rebuild only parts of the surrounding embankment wall that had once enclosed the island .
buildings that remained from the meiji period were to be used .
in 2000 , five buildings including the deputy factor 's quarters were opened and opened to the public .
in spring 2006 , the finishing touches were put on the chief factor 's residence , the japanese officials ' office , the head clerk 's quarters , the no . 3 warehouse , and the sea gate .
today , some 10 buildings have been restored .
in 2017 , six new buildings , as well as the omotemon-bashi bridge , were restored .
the bridge was officially opened in attendance of members of the japanese and dutch royal families .
all of its embankment walls will be fully restored .
this long term will include large-scale urban redevelopment in the area .
to make dejima an island again will require rerouting the nakashima river and moving a part of route 499 .
opperhoofd is a dutch word meaning ' supreme headman ' .
the japanese used to call the trading post chiefs " kapitan " which is derived from portuguese " capitao " bethel cf . latin " caput " , head amherst .
in its historical usage , the word is a gubernatorial title , comparable to the english chief factor , for the chief executive officer of a dutch " factory " in the sense of trading post , as led by a factor , i . e . agent .
