johann georg albrechtsberger -lrb- 3 february 1736 – 7 march 1809 -rrb- was an austrian composer , organist , and music theorist .
albrechtsberger was born in klosterneuburg , near vienna .
he studied music at melk abbey and philosophy at a benedictine seminary in vienna .
albrechtsberger 's earliest classmates included michael haydn and franz joseph aumann .
in 1755 he became organist at raab and maria taferl in 1757 .
in 1772 he was made organist at the court of vienna , and in 1792 kapellmeister of st . stephen 's cathedral .
after his death , some of his pupils became famous musicians .
among these were johann nepomuk hummel , ignaz moscheles , josef weigl dq 1766 – 1846 1846lston , ludwig-wilhelm tepper de fergusonsmith , antonio casimir cartellieri , ludwig van beethoven , anton reicha and franz xaver franz xaverius mozart .
beethoven had arrived in vienna in 1792 to study with joseph haydn .
beethoven then studied harmony and counterpoint .
when he finished his studies , the young student noted , " patience , diligence , persistence , and sincerity will lead to success , " which reflects albrechtsberger 's composition .
when beethoven was finished studying with albrechtsberger he decided to get a few more tips and pointers , so to speak , from haydn .
from there beethoven had been studying with antonio salieri , but this is unknown .
beethoven was quite possible that beethoven went off on his own to make a living , and only then returned after he had a stable career .
albrechtsberger died in vienna , austria .
but the greater proportion of his works , vocal and instrumental , exists only in manuscript .
the group is in the library of the vienna gesellschaft der musikfreunde .
around 1765 , he wrote at least seven concerti for jaw harp and strings stringscolor three survive in the hungarian national library in budapest keynes keynes .
they are pleasant , well-written works in the galant style .
one of his most famous works is his concerto for alto trombone and orchestra in b♭ major .
his work is often highlighted by the trombone community .
he also wrote a concerto for the mandola , op . 27 , written positively about in the 1914 book " the guitar and mandolin " .
probably the most valuable service he rendered to music was in his theoretical works .
in 1790 he published a treatise on composition , of which a third edition appeared in 1821 .
a collection of his writings on harmony , in three volumes , was published under the care of his pupil ignaz von seyfriedeux .
it was published in 1855 .
his compositional style came from johann joseph fux 's counterpoint , who was kapellmeister at st stephen 's cathedral 1713-1741 .
reicha became the first professor of counterpoint and fugue at the paris conservatoire from 1818 to 1836 .
