she has won the legion of honor , commander of the legion of honor , commander of the order of merit , the holberg memorial prize , the hannah arendt memorial foundation , the holberg international vision foundation prize , the hannah arendt memorial prize , and the hannah arendt international vision foundation .
kristeva went on to study at the university of sofia .
she became an active member of the group .
for example , her view of the subject , and its construction , shares similarities with sigmund freud and lacan .
instead , she favours a subject always " in process " or " on trial " .
in this way , she contributes to the poststructuralist critique of essentialized structures , while preserving the teachings of psychoanalysis .
one of kristeva 's most important contributions is that signification is composed of two elements , the symbolic and the " semiotic " .
augustine perumalil explained that kristeva 's " semiotic is closely related to the infantile pre-oedipal referred to in the works of freud , otto rank , melanie klein , british object relation psychoanalysis , and lacan 's pre-mirror stage .
it is an emotional field , tied to the instincts , which dwells in the fissures and prosody of language rather than in the denotative meanings of words .
the child learns to tell the difference between self and other .
in " desire in language " sabotage , kristeva describes the symbolic as the space in which the development of language allows the child to become a " speaking subject " .
this is known as abjection , which means the child must reject and move away from the mother in order to enter into the world of language , culture , meaning , and the social .
the queen of the republic of lithuania , kristeva , leaves the idea that even after entering the symbolic , the subject continues to oscillate between the semiotic and the symbolic .
this continued identification with the mother may result in what kristeva refers to in " black sun " magazinelity .
it has also been suggested that the degradation of women and women 's bodies in popular culture popularized in slasher films emerges because of the threat to identity that the mother 's body poses .
after abjecting the mother , subjects keep an unconscious fascination with the semiotic , desiring to reunite with the mother , while at the same time fearing the loss of identity that accompanies it .
slasher movies also provide a way for audience members to safely reenact the process of abjection by vicariously expelling and destroying the mother figure .
kristeva 's idea of the " chora " has been interpreted in several ways : as a reference to the uterus , as a metaphor for the relationship between the mother and child , and as the temporal period preceding the mirror stage .
kristeva refers to the " chora " as a non-expressive totality formed by drives and their stases in a motility that is full of movement as it is regulated .
kristeva is also known for her work on intertextuality .
kristeva argues that anthropology and psychology , or the connection between the social and the subject , do not represent each other , but rather follow the same logic : the survival of the group and the subject .
she also says that the speaking subject does not exist on his / her own , but that he / she " stands on the fragile threshold as if stranded on account of an impossible demarcation " powers of horror " , p . 85eux .
kristeva says that the way in which an individual excludes the abject mother as a means of forming an identity is the same way in which societies are constructed .
cultures exclude the female , and by this .
kristeva has been thought as a key figure of french feminism together with simone de beauvoir , helene cixous , and luce irigaray .
kristeva has had a strong influence on feminism and feminist literary studies in the us and the uk .
kristeva made a famous disambiguation of three types of feminism in " women 's time " in " new maladies of the soul " ; while rejecting the first two types , including that of beauvoir , her stands are sometimes considered rejecting feminism altogether .
history and individual psychic and sexual experiences can also be seen .
while the books have narrative suspense , her readers also find ideas from her theoretical projects .
her fictional oeuvre , which includes " the old man and the wolves " , " murder in byzantium " , and " possessions " , while often approaches the autobiographical in some passages , especially with one of the protagonists of " possessions " , stephanie delacour — a french journalist — who can be seen as kristeva 's ego .
kristeva won the holberg international memorial prize in 2004 .
she has also been awarded commander of the legion of honor , commander of the order of merit , and the vaclav havel prize .
she also said that she was a gift of releasing various ' damned questions ' from their traditional question marks .
roland barthes said that " julia kristeva changes the place of things : she always destroys the last prejudice , the one you thought you could be reassured by , could be taken sic pride in ; what she displaces is the already-said , the deja-dit , i . e . , the signified authority of the sciliation , i . e . , the authority of science , i . , i . e . , the authority of the subliation of the monostration of the science , i . , i . e . , the authority of the authority of the top of the top of the authority of the top of the authority of the science , is , and , of the authority of the authority of the authority of the monoliation of the subliation of the science . . .
he cites gayatri spivak 's conclusion that kristeva 's book " about chinese women " belongs to that very eighteenth century that kristeva scorns after pinpointing " the brief , expansive , often completely ungrounded way in which she writes about two thousand years of a culture she is unfamiliar with . "
almond also says that kristeva 's ideas about the muslim world and the dismissive terminology she uses to describe its culture and believers .
he criticizes kristeva 's opposition which juxtaposes " islamic societies " against " democracies where life is fairly pleasant " by pointing out that kristeva displays no awareness of the complex and nuanced debate among women theorists in the muslim world , and that she does not refer to anything other than the rushdie fats in the entire faith . "
in " intellectual impostures " , physics professors alan sokal and jean bricmont devote a chapter to kristeva 's use of mathematics in her writings .
they argue that kristeva does not show the relevance of the mathematical concepts she discusses to linguistics and the other fields she studies .
in 2018 , the bulgarian state dossier commission announced that kristeva had been an agent for the committee for state security under the code name " sabina " .
on 30 march , the state dossier commission began publishing online the entire set of documents .
after settling in paris in 1965 , she was cornered by bulgarian spooks who pointed out to her that she still had a vulnerable family in the home country .
so she agreed to regular meetings over many years , in the course of which she seems to have told her handlers nothing more than gossip about aragon , bataille & co . from the left bank cafes — stuff they could have read in " le canard enchaine " .
but never mind : they could impress their boss by showing him a real international celeb on their books . "
