The author of more than 30 books, including "Powers of Horror", "Tales of Love", "Black Sun: Depression and Melancholia", "Proust and the Sense of Time", and the trilogy "Female Genius", she has been awarded Commander of the Legion of Honor, Commander of the Order of Merit, the Holberg International Memorial Prize, the Hannah Arendt Prize, and the Vision 97 Foundation Prize, awarded by the Havel Foundation.
Kristeva went on to study at the University of Sofia, and while a postgraduate there obtained a research fellowship that enabled her to move to France in December 1965, when she was 24.
After joining the 'Tel Quel group' founded by Sollers, Kristeva focused on the politics of language and became an active member of the group.
For example, her view of the subject, and its construction, shares similarities with Sigmund Freud and Lacan.
However, Kristeva rejects any understanding of the subject in a structuralist sense; instead, she favors a subject always "in process" or "on trial".
In this way, she contributes to the poststructuralist critique of essentialized structures, whilst preserving the teachings of psychoanalysis.
One of Kristeva's most important contributions is that signification is composed of two elements, the symbolic and the "semiotic", the latter being distinct from the discipline of semiotics founded by Ferdinand de Saussure.
As explained by Augustine Perumalil, Kristeva's "semiotic is closely related to the infantile pre-Oedipal referred to in the works of Freud, Otto Rank, Melanie Klein, British Object Relation psychoanalysis, and Lacan's pre-mirror stage.
It is an emotional field, tied to the instincts, which dwells in the fissures and prosody of language rather than in the denotative meanings of words."
Upon entering the Mirror Stage, the child learns to distinguish between self and other, and enters the realm of shared cultural meaning, known as the symbolic.
In "Desire in Language" (1980), Kristeva describes the symbolic as the space in which the development of language allows the child to become a "speaking subject," and to develop a sense of identity separate from the mother.
This process of separation is known as abjection, whereby the child must reject and move away from the mother in order to enter into the world of language, culture, meaning, and the social.
Kristeva departs from Lacan in the idea that even after entering the symbolic, the subject continues to oscillate between the semiotic and the symbolic.
This continued identification with the mother may result in what Kristeva refers to in "Black Sun" (1989) as melancholia (depression), given that female children simultaneously reject and identify with the mother figure.
It has also been suggested (e.g., Creed, 1993) that the degradation of women and women's bodies in popular culture (and particularly, for example, in slasher films) emerges because of the threat to identity that the mother's body poses: it is a reminder of time spent in the undifferentiated state of the semiotic, where one has no concept of self or identity.
After abjecting the mother, subjects retain an unconscious fascination with the semiotic, desiring to reunite with the mother, while at the same time fearing the loss of identity that accompanies it.
Slasher films thus provide a way for audience members to safely reenact the process of abjection by vicariously expelling and destroying the mother figure.
Kristeva's idea of the "chora" has been interpreted in several ways: as a reference to the uterus, as a metaphor for the relationship between the mother and child, and as the temporal period preceding the Mirror Stage.
In her essay "Motherhood According to Giovanni Bellini" from "Desire in Language" (1980), Kristeva refers to the "chora" as a "non-expressive totality formed by drives and their stases in a motility that is full of movement as it is regulated."
Kristeva is also noted for her work on the concept of intertextuality.
Kristeva argues that anthropology and psychology, or the connection between the social and the subject, do not represent each other, but rather follow the same logic: the survival of the group and the subject.
Furthermore, in her analysis of Oedipus, she claims that the speaking subject cannot exist on his/her own, but that he/she "stands on the fragile threshold as if stranded on account of an impossible demarcation" ("Powers of Horror", p. 85).
In her comparison between the two disciplines, Kristeva claims that the way in which an individual excludes the abject mother as a means of forming an identity, is the same way in which societies are constructed.
On a broader scale, cultures exclude the maternal and the feminine, and by this come into being.
Kristeva has been regarded as a key proponent of French feminism together with Simone de Beauvoir, Hélène Cixous, and Luce Irigaray.
Kristeva has had a remarkable influence on feminism and feminist literary studies in the US and the UK, as well as on readings into contemporary art although her relation to feminist circles and movements in France has been quite controversial.
Kristeva made a famous disambiguation of three types of feminism in "Women's Time" in "New Maladies of the Soul" (1993); while rejecting the first two types, including that of Beauvoir, her stands are sometimes considered rejecting feminism altogether.
Language should also be viewed through the prisms of history and of individual psychic and sexual experiences.
While the books maintain narrative suspense and develop a stylized surface, her readers also encounter ideas intrinsic to her theoretical projects.
Her fictional oeuvre, which includes "The Old Man and the Wolves", "Murder in Byzantium", and "Possessions", while often allegorical, also approaches the autobiographical in some passages, especially with one of the protagonists of "Possessions", Stephanie Delacour—a French journalist—who can be seen as Kristeva's alter ego.
For her "innovative explorations of questions on the intersection of language, culture and literature", Kristeva was awarded the Holberg International Memorial Prize in 2004.
She has also been awarded Commander of the Legion of Honor, Commander of the Order of Merit, and the Vaclav Havel Prize.
Roman Jakobson said that "Both readers and listeners, whether agreeing or in stubborn disagreement with Julia Kristeva, feel indeed attracted to her contagious voice and to her genuine gift of questioning generally adopted 'axioms,' and her contrary gift of releasing various 'damned questions' from their traditional question marks."
Roland Barthes comments that "Julia Kristeva changes the place of things: she always destroys the last prejudice, the one you thought you could be reassured by, could be take sic pride in; what she displaces is the already-said, the déja-dit, i.e., the instance of the signified, i.e., stupidity; what she subverts is authority -the authority of monologic science, of filiation."
He cites Gayatri Spivak's conclusion that Kristeva's book "About Chinese Women" "belongs to that very eighteenth century that Kristeva scorns" after pinpointing "the brief, expansive, often completely ungrounded way in which she writes about two thousand years of a culture she is unfamiliar with".
Almond notes the absence of sophistication in Kristeva's remarks concerning the Muslim world and the dismissive terminology she uses to describe its culture and believers.
He criticizes Kristeva's opposition which juxtaposes "Islamic societies" against "democracies where life is still fairly pleasant" by pointing out that Kristeva displays no awareness of the complex and nuanced debate ongoing among women theorists in the Muslim world, and that she does not refer to anything other than the Rushdie fatwa in dismissing the entire Muslim faith as "reactionary and persecutory".
In "Intellectual Impostures" (1997), physics professors Alan Sokal and Jean Bricmont devote a chapter to Kristeva's use of mathematics in her writings.
They argue that Kristeva fails to show the relevance of the mathematical concepts she discusses to linguistics and the other fields she studies, and that no such relevance exists.
In 2018, Bulgaria's state Dossier Commission announced that Kristeva had been an agent for the Committee for State Security under the code name "Sabina".
On 30 March, the state Dossier Commission began publishing online the entire set of documents reflecting Kristeva's activity as an informant of the former Committee for State Security.
After settling in Paris in 1965, she was cornered by Bulgarian spooks who pointed out to her that she still had a vulnerable family in the home country.
So she agreed to regular meetings over many years, in the course of which she seems to have told her handlers nothing more than gossip about Aragon, Bataille & Co. from the Left Bank cafés – stuff they could have read in "Le Canard enchaîné"... the combined intelligence value of its product and her reports was almost zero.
But never mind: they could impress their boss by showing him a real international celeb on their books..."