a data sample is a set of data that is selected from a statistical population by a defined procedure .
sample points are known as observations .
typically , the population is very large .
the sample is a subset of manageable size .
samples are collected and statistics are calculated from the samples , so that one can make inferences or extrapolations from the sample to the population .
the data sample may be drawn from a population " without replacement " activation " .
a sample is a set of objects that have a set of well-defined selection criteria .
for example , a sample of australian men taller than 2m would consist of a list of every australian male taller than 2m .
it could include either german males or tall australian females , or people shorter than 2m .
so to compile such a complete sample requires a complete list of the parent population .
such a complete list is unlikely to exist .
but , such complete samples are often available in other disciplines .
an unbiasedgated sample is a set of objects chosen from a sample using a selection process that does not depend on the properties of the objects .
for example , an unbiased sample of australian men taller than 2m might consist of a randomly sampled subset of 1 % of australian males taller than 2m .
but one chosen from the electoral register might not be replaced since , for example , males aged under 18 will not be on the electoral register .
in an astronomical context , an unbiased sample might consist of that fraction of a complete sample for which data is available .
the best way to avoid a biased sample is to select a random sample .
a random sample is a sample where a sample of a known , non-zero chance of being selected .
there are several types of random samples .
a sample that is not random is called a non-random sample .
examples of nonrandom samples are convenience samples , judgment samples , purposive samples , quota samples , snowball samples , and quadrature nodes in quasi-monte carlo methods .
in probability distribution , given a random sample of length " n " skulls where " n " may be any positive integer ; it is identically distributed ; and is distributed distributed by random variables with distribution " f " .
a sample concrete represents the results of " n " experiments in which the same quantity is measured .
for example , if we want to estimate the average height of members of a particular population , we measure the heights of " n " individuals .
each measurement is drawn from the probability distribution " f " characterizing the population , so each measured height formula _ 1 is the realization of a random variable formula _ 2 with distribution " f " .
note that a set of random variables should not be confused with the realizations of these variables .
in other words , formula _ 2 is a function representing the measurement at the " i "-th experiment and formula _ 4 is the value obtained when making the measurement .
