this article lists dukes , electors , and kings ruling over different territories named saxony from the beginning of the saxon duchy in the 9th century to the end of the german monarchies in 1918 .
the electors of saxony from john the steadfastislaus or , according to some accounts , frederick the wiseworms have been lutheran until augustus ii of saxony converted to roman catholicism in order to be elected king of poland and grand duke of lithuania .
the duchy of saxony was the lands of the saxon people in the north-western part of germany .
when the welfs left in 1180 , the duchy of saxony was reduced in territory .
the ascanian dukes had their base further east , near the elbe , in what is sometimes called the " younger duchy of saxony " .
in the 10th century the emperor otto i had created the county palatine of saxony in the saale-unstrut area of southern saxony .
the landgraves of thuringia were held by a count of hessengau , then from the early 11th century by the counts of goseck , later by the counts of sommerschenburg , and still later by the landgraves of thuringia .
when the wettin landgraves became part of the electorate of saxony , the two positions merged .
the new dukes replaced the saxon horse emblem and introduced their ascanian family colours and emblem added by a bendwise crancelin , symbolising the saxon ducal crown , as new coat-of-arms of saxony .
later , the house of wettin adopted the ascanian coat of arms .
after the division , the counting of the dukes started anew .
the male line of the saxe-lauenburgish ascanians was extinguished in 1689 , after julius francis ' death .
the duchy was not able to keep the legitimate heiress , anna maria franziska of saxe-lauenburg , and gave it to its brunswick and lunenburg-celle line .
the coat of arms of saxe-lauenburg was changed to the colours red and silver , with a border in the prussian colours of black and white .
the two duchies decided to merge saxe-lauenburg into prussia , as district of lauenburg , with effect from july 1,1876 .
the ascanian line of saxe-wittenberg became extinct when elector albert iii died in 1422 .
late albert 's ascanian relative duke eric v of saxe-lauenburg protested in vain .