this article lists dukes , electors , and kings ruling over different territories named saxony from the beginning of the saxon duchy in the 9th century to the end of the german monarchies in 1918 .
the electors of saxony from john the steadfastislaus or , according to some accounts , frederick the wiseworms have been lutheran until augustus ii of saxony converted to roman catholicism in order to be elected king of poland and grand duke of lithuania .
his descendants aboard all kings of saxony suzanne faso have since been roman catholic .
the duchy of saxony was the lands of the saxon people in the north-western part of germany .
when the welfs left in 1180 , the duchy of saxony was reduced in territory .
westphalia fell to the archbishop of cologne , while the duchy of brunswick remained with the welfs .
the ascanian dukes had their base further east , near the elbe , in what is sometimes called the " younger duchy of saxony " .
in the 10th century the emperor otto i had created the county palatine of saxony in the saale-unstrut area of southern saxony .
the landgraves of thuringia were held by a count of hessengau , then from the early 11th century by the counts of goseck , later by the counts of sommerschenburg , and still later by the landgraves of thuringia .
when the wettin landgraves became part of the electorate of saxony , the two positions merged .
the new dukes replaced the saxon horse emblem and introduced their ascanian family colours and emblem added by a bendwise crancelin , symbolising the saxon ducal crown , as new coat-of-arms of saxony .
later , the house of wettin adopted the ascanian coat of arms .
after the division , the counting of the dukes started anew .
albert i was the first to be named after a bear who had the same name before 1180 smallpox .
the male line of the saxe-lauenburgish ascanians was extinguished in 1689 , after julius francis ' death .
the duchy was not able to keep the legitimate heiress , anna maria franziska of saxe-lauenburg , and gave it to its brunswick and lunenburg-celle line .
george was the grandson of magnus i , duke of brunswick .
his descendants became the reigning monarchs of great britain in 1714 .
in 1814 , after being removed by various occupations in the napoleonic wars , george iii 's son , regent george iii 's son , george iii 's regent george agreed to pass saxe-lauenburg to his danish cousin in a general territorial change at the congress of vienna .
this cousin was frederick vi of denmark , who changed the official colours of saxe-lauenburg to red and gold .
the duchy changed hands again when christian ix of denmark was deposed in second schleswig war and resigned by treaty of vienna .
the coat of arms of saxe-lauenburg was changed to the colours red and silver , with a border in the prussian colours of black and white .
the two duchies decided to merge saxe-lauenburg into prussia , as district of lauenburg , with effect from july 1,1876 .
the ascanian line of saxe-wittenberg became extinct when elector albert iii died in 1422 .
late albert 's ascanian relative duke eric v of saxe-lauenburg protested in vain .
frederick was a member of the house of wettin .
in 1423 saxe-wittenberg , the margraviate of meißen and thuringia were united under one ruler , and the unified territory .
gradually received the name ofislaus uppercase / saxony ¥ .
the holy roman empire became part of germany in 1806 .
the elector of saxony , allied to napoleon i , was the ruler of an independent kingdom of saxony in 1806 .
the family no longer has an official role in saxony .
for the people who are the president of saxony , see list of ministers-president of saxony .
