sergei mikhailovich eisenstein , the russian composer , was the leader of the academy of the soviet union .
he was a pioneer in the theory and practice of montage .
her father would later move him to join them around 1910 .
his mother and father left the family to live in france .
eisenstein was raised as an orthodox christian , but became an atheist later on .
in 1918 , he left school and joined the red army to serve the bolshevik revolution .
eisenstein began his career as a theorist in 1923 .
dziga vertov hired at first as an " instructor " .
"
he was then able to direct " " taller than the october revolution of 1917 " .
while critics outside of soviet russia praised these works , eisenstein 's focus in the movies on structural issues such as camera angles , crowd movements , and montage brought him and like-minded others such as vsevolod pudovkin and alexander dovzhenko under fire from the soviet movie community .
the trip was supposed to allow the three to learn about sound motion pictures and to present themselves as soviet artists in person to the capitalist west .
eisenstein , however , was also a opportunity to see landscapes and cultures outside the soviet union .
in late april 1930 , jesse l . lasky , on behalf of paramount pictures , offered eisenstein the opportunity to make a movie in the united states .
eisenstein proposed a biography of munitions tycoon basil zaharoff and a movie version of " arms and the man " by george bernard shaw .
many of his theoretical articles from this period , such as " eisenstein on disney " , have surfaced decades later as seminal scholarly texts used as curriculum in movie schools around the world .
sinclair 's works had been accepted by and were widely read in the ussr , and were known to eisenstein .
between the end of october 1930 and thanksgiving of that year , sinclair had secured an extension of eisenstein 's absences from the ussr , and permission for him to travel to mexico .
the trip to mexico was for eisenstein to make a movie produced by sinclair and his wife mary .
after a long time away from the soviet union , stalin sent a telegram saying that eisenstein had become a deserter .
kimbrough had been sent along to act as a line producer for the movie .
eisenstein hoped to pressure the sinclairs to stop stalin , so eisenstein could finish the movie in his own way .
for the unfinished filming of the novel soldadera , eisenstein had secured 500 soldiers , 10,000 guns , and 50 cannons from the mexican army , but this was lost due to sinclair 's canceling of production .
when eisenstein arrived at the american border , a customs search of his trunk revealed sketches and drawings of jesus .
his re-entry visa had expired , and sinclair 's contacts in washington were unable to secure him an additional extension .
eisenstein , aleksandrov , and tisse were allowed , after a month 's stay at the u . s .-mexico border outside laredo , texas , a 30-day " pass " to get from texas to new york , and leaves for moscow , while kimbrough returned to los angeles with the remaining movie .
eisenstein toured the american south on his way to new york .
lesser agreed to supervise post-production work on the miles of negative — at the sinclairs ' expense — and distribute any resulting product .
two short movies and a short subject — " thunder over mexico " based on the " maguey " footage , " eisenstein in mexico " , and " death day " — were completed and released in the united states between the autumn of 1933 and early 1934 .
eisenstein never saw any of the sinclair-lesser movies , nor a later effort by his first biographer , marie seton , called " time in the sun " , released in 1940 .
he would publicly say that he had lost all interest in the project .
in 1978 , gregori aleksandrov released his own version , which was awarded the honorable golden prize at the 11th moscow international film festival in 1979 .
later , in 1998 , oleg kovalov edited a free version of the movie , calling it " mexican fantasy " .
eisenstein 's foray into the west made the soviet movie industry look at him with a suspicion that would never completely disappear .
in 1935 , eisenstein was assigned another project , " bezhin meadow " , but it appears the movie was afflicted with many of the same problems as " ¡ que viva mexico ! "
eisenstein decided to film two versions of the scenario , one for adult viewers and one for children , was not able to define a clear shooting schedule .
boris shumyatsky , the " de facto " head of the soviet movie industry , finally called a halt to the filming and cancelled further production .
stalin ended up taking the position that the " bezhin meadow " catastrophe , along with several other problems facing the industry at that point , had less to do with eisenstein 's approach to filmmaking as with the executives who were supposed to have been supervising him .
in early 1938 , he was denounced , arrested , tried and convicted as a traitor , and shot .
eisenstein was then able toiate himself with stalin for ' one more chance ' , and he chose , from two offerings , the job of a biopic of alexander nevsky , with music composed by sergei prokofiev .
this time , he was assigned a co-scenarist , pyotr pavlenko , to bring in a completed script ; professional actors to play the roles ; and an assistant director , dmitri vasilyev , to expedite shooting .
the result was a movie critically received by both the soviets and in the west , which won him the order of lenin and the stalin prize .
this was started , completed , and put in theatres all within the year 1938 .
within months of its release , stalin entered into a pact with hitler , and " nevsky " was quickly pulled from distribution .
after the outbreak of war with germany in 1941 , " nevsky " was re-released with a wide distribution and earned international success .
with the war coming to moscow , eisenstein was one of many filmmakers evacuated to alma-ata .
eisenstein wrote letters with prokofiev from alma-ata , and was joined by him there in 1942 .
prokofiev composed the score for eisenstein 's movie .
he died of a heart attack in 1948 at the age of 50 .
his remains were cremated on 13 february , and his ashes were buried in novodevichy cemetery in moscow .
he and lev kuleshov , two of the earliest movie theorists , argued that montage was the essence of the cinema .
his writings and movies have continued to have a major impact on later filmmakers .
eisenstein believed that editing could be used for more than just explaining the scene or moment through a " linkage " of related images .
eisenstein felt the " collision " of shots could be used to manipulate the emotions of the audience and create movie metaphors .
he believed that an idea should be made from the juxtaposition of two shots , bringing an element of collage into film .
exercises and examples for students were based on literature such as honore de balzac 's " le pere goriot . "
another idea was that the haitian struggle for independence was in anatolii vinogradov 's " the black consul " .
lessons from this scenario delved into the character of jean-jacques dessalines , replaying his movements , actions , and the drama surrounding him .
eisenstein 's teaching , like his movies , was politically charged and contained quotes from vladimir lenin .
in his first movies , eisenstein did not use professional actors .
he used stock characters , and the roles were filled with untrained people from the classes .
like many bolshevik artists , eisenstein pictured a new society which would subsidize artists totally .
the isolated new nation did not have the resources to nationalize its movie business at first .
when it did , limited resources – both monetary and equipment – required production controls as big as in the capitalist world .