sergei mikhailovich eisenstein , the russian composer , was the leader of the academy of the soviet union .
he was a pioneer in the theory and practice of montage .
he is known in particular for his silent movies " strike " — battleship potemkin " diameter 1925 iihf , " " battleship potemkin " — and " " liszt " – as well as the historical epics " alexander nevsky " [mask] 1938 fiba -lrb- 1944 -rrb- ; and " ivan the terrible " ; 1958 -lrb-rrb- .
in its decennial poll , the magazine " sight & sound " named his " battleship potemkin " the 11th greatest movie of all time .
eisenstein was born in riga , latvia .
his father was architect mikhail osipovich eisenstein .
the family had converted to russian orthodox church .
his mother was a russian orthodox woman .
she was the daughter of a prosperous merchant .
julia left riga the year of the 1905 revolution .
her father would later move him to join them around 1910 .
his mother and father left the family to live in france .
eisenstein was raised as an orthodox christian , but became an atheist later on .
eisenstein studied architecture and engineering at the petrograd institute of civil engineering .
in 1918 , he left school and joined the red army to serve the bolshevik revolution .
this brought sergei to petrograd , vologda , and dvinsk .
in 1920 sergei was transferred to a command position in minsk , after success providing propaganda for the october revolution .
at this time , he learned about 300 kanji characters .
he traveled to japan .
eisenstein moved to moscow in 1920 .
his productions there were named " gas masks " , " listen moscow " , and " wiseman " .
he worked as a designer for vsevolod meyerhold .
eisenstein began his career as a theorist in 1923 .
dziga vertov hired at first as an " instructor " .
" strike "tify 1925oite eisenstein 's first full-length movie .
" battleship potemkin " assassinated many people in the world .
he was then able to direct " " taller than the october revolution of 1917 " .
while critics outside of soviet russia praised these works , eisenstein 's focus in the movies on structural issues such as camera angles , crowd movements , and montage brought him and like-minded others such as vsevolod pudovkin and alexander dovzhenko under fire from the soviet movie community .
this forced him to issue public articles of self-criticism and commitments to change his cinematic visions to fit the increasingly specific doctrines of socialist realism .
in the autumn of 1928 , eisenstein left the soviet union for a tour of europe .
the trip was supposed to allow the three to learn about sound motion pictures and to present themselves as soviet artists in person to the capitalist west .
eisenstein , however , was also a opportunity to see landscapes and cultures outside the soviet union .
he spent the next two years touring and lecturing in berlin , zurich , london , and paris .
in 1929 , in switzerland , eisenstein supervised an educational documentary about abortion directed by tisse entitled " frauennot – frauengluck " .
in late april 1930 , jesse l . lasky , on behalf of paramount pictures , offered eisenstein the opportunity to make a movie in the united states .
he accepted a short-term contract for $ 100,000logram $ 1,500 in 2017 dollars .
eisenstein proposed a biography of munitions tycoon basil zaharoff and a movie version of " arms and the man " by george bernard shaw .
paramount proposed a movie version of theodore dreiser 's " an american tragedy " .
eisenstein had read and liked the work .
eisenstein completed a script by the start of october 1930 .
pease , an anti-communist , started a public campaign against eisenstein .
on october 23,1930 , paramount and eisenstein declared their contract canceled .
eisenstein was faced with returning home a failure .
the soviet movie industry was solving the sound-movie issue without him .
many of his theoretical articles from this period , such as " eisenstein on disney " , have surfaced decades later as seminal scholarly texts used as curriculum in movie schools around the world .
eisenstein spent a lot of time with charlie chaplin .
sinclair 's works had been accepted by and were widely read in the ussr , and were known to eisenstein .
between the end of october 1930 and thanksgiving of that year , sinclair had secured an extension of eisenstein 's absences from the ussr , and permission for him to travel to mexico .
the trip to mexico was for eisenstein to make a movie produced by sinclair and his wife mary .
on november 24,1930 , eisenstein signed a contract with the trust .
the contract also said that the movie would be " non-political " , that immediately available funding came from mary sinclair in an amount of " not less than twenty-five thousand dollars " .
by december 4 , eisenstein was on his way to mexico by train .
later he made a short summary of the six-part movie .
the title of the project , " ¡ que viva mexico ! " ,
, was decided on some time later .
eisenstein liked these artists and mexican culture in general .
the left-wing u . s . film community eagerly followed his progress in mexico .
after a long time away from the soviet union , stalin sent a telegram saying that eisenstein had become a deserter .
kimbrough had been sent along to act as a line producer for the movie .
eisenstein hoped to pressure the sinclairs to stop stalin , so eisenstein could finish the movie in his own way .
the three soviets to see what they could do with the movie already shot .
for the unfinished filming of the novel soldadera , eisenstein had secured 500 soldiers , 10,000 guns , and 50 cannons from the mexican army , but this was lost due to sinclair 's canceling of production .
when eisenstein arrived at the american border , a customs search of his trunk revealed sketches and drawings of jesus .
his re-entry visa had expired , and sinclair 's contacts in washington were unable to secure him an additional extension .
eisenstein , aleksandrov , and tisse were allowed , after a month 's stay at the u . s .-mexico border outside laredo , texas , a 30-day " pass " to get from texas to new york , and leaves for moscow , while kimbrough returned to los angeles with the remaining movie .
eisenstein toured the american south on his way to new york .
lesser had just opened his own distribution office in new york , principal distributing corporation .
lesser agreed to supervise post-production work on the miles of negative — at the sinclairs ' expense — and distribute any resulting product .
two short movies and a short subject — " thunder over mexico " based on the " maguey " footage , " eisenstein in mexico " , and " death day " — were completed and released in the united states between the autumn of 1933 and early 1934 .
eisenstein never saw any of the sinclair-lesser movies , nor a later effort by his first biographer , marie seton , called " time in the sun " , released in 1940 .
he would publicly say that he had lost all interest in the project .
in 1978 , gregori aleksandrov released his own version , which was awarded the honorable golden prize at the 11th moscow international film festival in 1979 .
later , in 1998 , oleg kovalov edited a free version of the movie , calling it " mexican fantasy " .
eisenstein 's foray into the west made the soviet movie industry look at him with a suspicion that would never completely disappear .
he apparently spent some time in a mental hospital in kislovodsk in july 1933 .
in 1933 and 1934 , he was in charge of writing the teaching plan .
in 1935 , eisenstein was assigned another project , " bezhin meadow " , but it appears the movie was afflicted with many of the same problems as " ¡ que viva mexico ! " .
eisenstein decided to film two versions of the scenario , one for adult viewers and one for children , was not able to define a clear shooting schedule .
boris shumyatsky , the " de facto " head of the soviet movie industry , finally called a halt to the filming and cancelled further production .
stalin ended up taking the position that the " bezhin meadow " catastrophe , along with several other problems facing the industry at that point , had less to do with eisenstein 's approach to filmmaking as with the executives who were supposed to have been supervising him .
in early 1938 , he was denounced , arrested , tried and convicted as a traitor , and shot .
eisenstein was then able toiate himself with stalin for ' one more chance ' , and he chose , from two offerings , the job of a biopic of alexander nevsky , with music composed by sergei prokofiev .
this time , he was assigned a co-scenarist , pyotr pavlenko , to bring in a completed script ; professional actors to play the roles ; and an assistant director , dmitri vasilyev , to expedite shooting .
the result was a movie critically received by both the soviets and in the west , which won him the order of lenin and the stalin prize .
it was an allegory and hard warning against the massing forces of nazi germany , well played and well made .
the script had nevsky utter a number of traditional russian proverbs , verbally rooting his fight against germanic invaders in russian traditions .
this was started , completed , and put in theatres all within the year 1938 .
within months of its release , stalin entered into a pact with hitler , and " nevsky " was quickly pulled from distribution .
eisenstein returned to teaching .
after the outbreak of war with germany in 1941 , " nevsky " was re-released with a wide distribution and earned international success .
with the war coming to moscow , eisenstein was one of many filmmakers evacuated to alma-ata .
eisenstein wrote letters with prokofiev from alma-ata , and was joined by him there in 1942 .
prokofiev composed the score for eisenstein 's movie .
eisenstein 's movie " ivan the terrible , part i " , presenting ivan iv of russia as a national hero , won stalin 's approval rating .
all of the footage from " ivan the terrible , part iii " was taken away .
eisenstein married filmmaker and screenwriter pera atashevandt in 1934 .
eisenstein suffered a heart attack on february 2,1946 , and spent much of the next year recovering .
he died of a heart attack in 1948 at the age of 50 .
his remains were cremated on 13 february , and his ashes were buried in novodevichy cemetery in moscow .
eisenstein was a pioneer in the use of montage , a specific use of movie editing .
he and lev kuleshov , two of the earliest movie theorists , argued that montage was the essence of the cinema .
his articles and books — particularly " film form " and " the film sense " — explain the significance of montage in detail .
his writings and movies have continued to have a major impact on later filmmakers .
eisenstein believed that editing could be used for more than just explaining the scene or moment through a " linkage " of related images .
eisenstein felt the " collision " of shots could be used to manipulate the emotions of the audience and create movie metaphors .
he believed that an idea should be made from the juxtaposition of two shots , bringing an element of collage into film .
eisenstein taught movie making during his career at gik .
exercises and examples for students were based on literature such as honore de balzac 's " le pere goriot . "
another idea was that the haitian struggle for independence was in anatolii vinogradov 's " the black consul " .
lessons from this scenario delved into the character of jean-jacques dessalines , replaying his movements , actions , and the drama surrounding him .
eisenstein also taught the technicalities of directing , photography , and editing .
eisenstein 's teaching , like his movies , was politically charged and contained quotes from vladimir lenin .
in his first movies , eisenstein did not use professional actors .
his narratives did not focus on individual characters .
he used stock characters , and the roles were filled with untrained people from the classes .
eisenstein 's vision of communism brought him into conflict with officials in the ruling regime of stalin .
like many bolshevik artists , eisenstein pictured a new society which would subsidize artists totally .
the isolated new nation did not have the resources to nationalize its movie business at first .
when it did , limited resources – both monetary and equipment – required production controls as big as in the capitalist world .
