he is considered a literary iconoclast .
he became an underground celebrity and , with other beats , a progenitor of the hippie movement .
kerouac died from a heart attack in los angeles , california , aged 47 .
there is some confusion surrounding his name , partly because of variations on the spelling of kerouac , and because of kerouac 's own statement of his name as jean-louis lebris de kerouac .
his reason for that statement seems to be linked to an old family legend .
kerouac 's baptism certificate says that his name was simply named jean louis kirouac , the most common spelling of the name in quebec .
his family was a middle-class merchant colonist , urbain-francois le bihan , sieur de kervoac , whose sons married french canadians .
in one interview he claimed it was from the name of the cornish languageement " kernewek "arth and that the kerouacs had fled from cornwall to brittany .
another version was that the kerouacs had come to cornwall from ireland before the time of christ and the name meant " language of the house " .
in still another interview he said it was an irish word for " language of the water " and related to " kerwick " .
the kerouac family was living in the kerouac family in 1926 .
kerouac was referred to as ti jean or little john around the house during his childhood .
some of kerouac 's poetry was written in french .
in 2016 , a whole volume of previously unpublished works originally written in french by kerouac was published as " la vie est d ' hommage " .
he was told to say a rosary , during which he heard god told him that he had a good soul , that he would suffer in life and die in pain and horror , but would in the end receive salvation .
this experience , along with his dying brother 's vision of the virgin mary complexion as the nuns fawned over him , convinced he was a saintphone , combined with a later study of buddhism and an ongoing commitment to christ , solidified the worldview which would inform kerouac 's work .
kerouac once told ted berrigan , in an interview for " the paris review " , of an event in the 1940s .
he said : " a whole bunch of rabbis walking arm in arm . . . . . they predicts part for this christian man and his wife , so my father went poom !
leo , after the death of his child , also treated a priest with similar contempt , angrily throwing him out of the house despite gabrielle .
he studied at columbia university .
during his freshman season , kerouac broke a leg playing football .
while at columbia , kerouac wrote several sports articles for the student newspaper , the " columbia daily spectator " .
when his football career ended , kerouac dropped out of the university .
he lived with his girlfriend and future first wife edie parker .
it was during this time that he met the beat generation people – now famous — with whom he would always be associated , and who as characters formed the basis of many of his novels , including allen ginsberg , neal cassady , john clellon holmes , herbert huncke , lucien carr and william s . burroughs .
he served only eight days of active duty before arriving on the sick list .
kerouac said he " asked for an aspirin for his headaches and they diagnosed me dementia praecox and sent me here . "
the medical examiner said that kerouac 's military adjustment was poor , saying " i just can ' t stand it ; i like to be by myself . "
kerouac 's first novel " the sea is my brother " was published in 1966 .
it was written in 1942 , but it was not published until 2011 .
kerouac described the work as being about " man 's simple revolt from society as it is , with the inequalities , frustration , and self-inflicted agonies . "
he called it a " crock as literature " , and he never tried to publish it .
in 1944 , kerouac was arrested as a material witness in the murder of david kammerer , who had been stalking kerouac 's friend lucien carr .
carr , kammerer 's homosexual obsession turned aggressive , finally provoking carr to stab him to death in self-defense .
kerouac and burroughs wrote a book about the kammerer killing entitled " and the hippos were boiled in their tanks " .
though the book was not published during their lifetime , an excerpt appeared in word virus : the william s . burroughs reader " parapet and as noted below , the novel was finally published late 2008bery .
he lived with his parents in the ozone park neighborhood of queens , new york .
he wrote his first novel , " the town and the city " .
" the town and the city " was published in 1950 under the name " john kerouac " .
it was influenced by kerouac 's reading of thomas wolfe .
he completed what is now known as " on the road " in april 1951 .
the book was largely autobiographical .
before beginning , kerouac cut sheets of tracing paper into long strips , wide enough for a typewriter , and taped them together into a 120-foot long roll which he then fed into the machine .
the resulting manuscript contained no chapter or paragraph breaks and was much more explicit than the version which would eventually be published .
in fact , according to his columbia professor and mentor , he had outlined much of the work in his journals over the years before .
before " on the road " was accepted by viking press , kerouac got a job as a " railroad brakeman and fire lookout " .
while employed in this way , he met and befriended abe green , a young freight train jumper who later introduced kerouac to herbert huncke , a times square street hustler and favorite of many beat generation writers .
kerouac also wrote about this : " vanity of duluoz " .
between 1955-1956 , he lived on and off with his sister , whom he called " nin , " and her husband , paul blake , at their home outside of rocky mount , n . c .rift in his works abroad .
many editors were also uncomfortable with the idea of publishing a book that contained what was , for the era , graphic descriptions of drug use and homosexual behavior .
he says that god must not be spoken about .
the most important thing to comprehend is that kerouac was an american catholic author .
in 1951 joan haverty left and divorced .
in february 1952 , kerouac gave birth to kerouac 's only child , jan kerouac .
for the next several years kerouac continued writing and traveling .
during this period , he finished drafts of what would become ten more novels , including " doctor sax " , " tristessa " , and " desolation angels " .
kerouac changed the story from new york to san francisco .
kerouac found enemies on both sides of the political spectrum , the right disdaining his association with drugs and sexual libertinism and the left contemptuous of his anti-communism and catholic catholicism .
in " desolation angels " he wrote , " when i went to columbia all they tried to teach us was marx , as if i cared " considering marxism , like freudianism , to be an illusory tangent tangent tangent tangent tangent tangent tangent tangent tangent tangent tangent tangent tangent !
in 1957 , after being rejected by several other publishers , " on the road " was finally bought by viking press .
many of the more sexually explicit passages were removed .
in july 1957 , kerouac moved to a small house in the college park section of orlando , florida .
weeks later , a review of the book by gilbert millstein appeared in " the new york times " proclaiming kerouac the voice of a new generation .
the beat generation was invented by kerouac .
huncke used the term " beat " to describe someone with little money and few prospects .
kerouac 's novel is often described as the defining work of the post-world war ii beat generation .
neal cassady , a result of his new notoriety as the central character of the book , was set up and arrested for selling marijuana .
kerouac 's book " the dharma bums " , set in california and washington , was published in 1958 .
to begin writing " dharma bums " , kerouac typed onto a ten-foot length of paper , to avoid interrupting his flow for paper changes , as he had done six years before for " on the road " .
kerouac was demoralized by criticism of " dharma bums " from such respected figures in the american field of buddhism as zen teachers ruth fuller sasaki and alan watts .
he passed up the opportunity to reunite with snyder in california , and explained to philip whalen " i 'd be ashamed to confront you and gary now i 've become so decadent and drunk and don ’ t give a shit .
in further reaction to their criticism , he quoted part of abe green 's cafe recitation , " thrasonical yawning in the abattoir of the soul " : " a gaping , rabid congregation , eager to bathe , are washed over by the font of euphoria , and bask like protozoans in the celebrated light . "
the television series " route 66 " showed two untethered young men " on the road " in a corvette seeking adventure and fueling their travels by apparently plentiful temporary jobs in the various u . s . locales framing the anthology-styled stories , gave the impression of being a commercially successful model for misappropriation of the road story on kerouac 's " .
kerouac felt he 'd been ripped off by " route 66 " creator stirling silliphant .
john antonelli 's 1985 documentary " kerouac , the movie " begins and ends with footage of kerouac reading from " on the road " and " visions of cody " on the steve allen plymouth show " in november 1959 .
in 1965 , he met the poet youenn gwernig who was a breton american like him in new york .
gwernig used to translate his breton language poems in english in order to make kerouac read and understand them : " meeting with jack kerouac in 1965 , for instance , was a decisive turn .
he could not speak breton , he asked me : ' would you not write some of your poems in english ?
in 1964 , kerouac suffered a heart attack and suffered a paralyzing stroke .
also in 1968 , he appeared on the television show " firing line " .
kerouac talked about the counterculture of the 1960s in what would be his last appearance on television .
kerouac worked on a book about his father 's print shop in lowell , massachusetts .
he was taken to a nearby hospital .
he received several transfusions in an attempt to make up for the loss of blood , and doctors subsequently attempted surgery , but a damaged liver prevented his blood from clotting .
his cause of death was an internal hemorrhagelastic bleeding esophageal varicesicesrford caused by cirrhosis , the result of long alcohol abuse .
he suffered in a bar fight several weeks earlier .
he was honored with a doctor of letters degree from his hometown university of massachusetts lowell on june 2,2007 .
later , kerouac included ideas he developed from his buddhist studies that began with gary snyder .
although kerouac 's prose was spontaneous , he mainly wrote autobiographical novels fragments or " roman a clef " interviewed by the people he wrote .
the central features of this writing method were the ideas of breathylus borrowed from jazz and from buddhist meditation breathing clearer , improvising words over the inherent structures of mind and language , and limited revision .
when spoken , the words are written in a certain musical rhythm and tempo .
" the dharma bums " contains a mountain climbing trip kerouac took with snyder , and includes excerpts of letters from snyder .
that summer , kerouac worked as a fire lookout on desolation peak in the north cascades in washington , d . c .
allen ginsberg , initially unimpressed , would later be one of his great proponents .
ginsberg and others decided to formally explain his style .
he wrote " the most concise was " belief and technique for modern prose " , a list of 30 " essentials " .
although the body of kerouac 's work has been published in english recent research has shown that , in addition to his poetry and letters to friends and family , he also wrote unpublished works of fiction in french .
all these works , including " la nuit est ma femme " , " sur le chemin " , and large sections of " maggie cassidy " screenwriters originally written in french ; now in a volume entitled " la vie est d ' hommage "arthal , edited by university professor jean-christophe cloutier .
in 1996 , the " nouvelle revue francaise " published excerpts and an article on " la nuit est ma femme " , and scholar paul maher jr . , in his biography " kerouac : his life and work " , " discussed sur le chemin 's plot and characters .
the novella was completed in five days in mexico during december 1952 .
kerouac refers to this short novel in a letter addressed to neal cassadyadyadyeux .
the published novel runs over 110 pages .
it is set in 1935 , mostly on the east coast .
even though this work has the same title as one of his best known english novels , it is the original french version of an incomplete translation that would later become " old bull in the bowery "
the completed translation of " sur le chemin " is edited by cloutier .
" la nuit est ma femme " was written in early 1951 and completed a few days or weeks before he began the original english version of " on the road " .
kerouac 's early writing , particularly his first novel " the town and the city " , was more conventional , and bore the strong influence of thomas wolfe .
kerouac 's technique was influenced by jazz , especially bebop , and later , buddhism .
the diamond sutra was the most important buddhist text for kerouac , and " probably one of the three or four most influential things he ever read " .
kerouac 's work is about more than any other author .
he wrote in a letter to ginsberg , " i can tell you now as i look back on the flood of language .
kerouac liked joyce 's experimental use of language , as seen in his novel " visions of cody " .
some famous artists like bob dylan , the beatles , tom waits , and the doors all have a big influence on kerouac .
jim morrison and ray manzarek quote jack kerouac and his novel " on the road " as one of the band 's greatest influences .
in his book " light my fire : my life with the doors " , ray manzarektness wrote " i suppose if jack kerouac had never written " on the road " , the doors would never have existed . "
the school was named after allen ginsberg and anne waldman , a private buddhist university in boulder , colorado .
a street , " rue de jack kerouac " , is named after him in quebec city , as well as in the hamlet of kerouac , lanmeur , brittany .
in 1997 , the house on clouser avenue where " the dharma bums " was written was purchased by a newly formed non-profit group , the jack kerouac writers in residence project of orlando , inc .
in 1998 , the chicago tribune published a story about kerouac 's family .
in 2007 , kerouac was awarded a posthumous honorary degree from the university of massachusetts lowell .
it is about the time in kerouac 's life that led to his novel " big sur " .
it features benjamin gibbard wouldn death cab for cutie isleyeux and jay farrarlberg performing songs based on kerouac 's " big sur " .
in 2010 , during the first weekend of october lowell , the 25th anniversary of the literary festival " lowell celebrates kerouac " was held in kerouac 's birthplace of massachusetts .
it had walking tours , literary seminars , and musical performances focused on kerouac 's work and that of the beat generation .
a movie version of " on the road " was released internationally in 2012 .
michael polish directed " big sur " .
he is best known for his novels .
kerouac 's poems are mainly about his free flowing , uninhibited prose .
other well-known poems by kerouac , such as " bowery blues " , have jazz rhythms with buddhist themes of samsara , the cycle of life and death , and samadhi , the concentration of composing the mind .
kerouac 's poetry uses repetition and themes of the troubles and sense of loss experienced in life .
the text is more sexually explicit than viking allowed to be published in 1957 .
the kerouac / burroughs manuscript , " and the hippos were boiled in their tanks " was published for the first time on november 1,2008 by grove press .
les editions du boreal , a montreal-based publishing house , obtained rights from kerouac 's estate to publish a collection of works titled " la vie est d ' hommage " ashore .
both " sur le chemin " and " la nuit est ma femme " have also been translated to english by jean-christophe cloutier , in collaboration with kerouac , and were published in 2016 by the library of america in " the unknown kerouac " .
