sir andrew john wilestaff -lrb- born 11 april 1953 -rrb- is an english mathematician .
he is best known for proving fermat 's last theorem .
fascinated by the existence of a theorem that was so easy to state that he could understand it , but that no one had proven , he decided to be the first person to prove it .
gerhard frey had previously linked to fermat 's famous equation .
wiles earned his bachelor 's degree in mathematics in 1974 at merton college , oxford , and a phd in 1980 as a graduate student of clare college , cambridge .
after a stay at the institute for advanced study in princeton , new jersey , wiles became a professor of mathematics at princeton university .
wiles was a royal society research professor at the university of oxford from 1988 to 1990 .
in 2018 , he became regius professor of mathematics at oxford , the first in the university 's history .
soon after , he made this theory into totally real fields .
he is remembered today as the author of the book " andrew has few equals in terms of his impact on modern number theory .
many of the world ’ s very best young number theorists received their phds under andrew .
gerhard frey , jean-pierre serre and ken ribet said that fermat 's last theorem could be proven as a corollary of a limited form of the modularity theorem unproven at the time and then known as the taniyamural conjecture .
for example , wiles ' ex-supervisor john coates said that it seemed " impossible to actually prove " .
despite this , wiles , with his from childhood fascination with fermat 's last theorem , decided to challenge the conjecture , at least to the extent needed for frey 's curve .
he dedicated all of his research time to this problem for over six years in secrecy .
in june 1993 , he gave his proof to the public for the first time at a conference in cambridge .
this came to him on 19 september 1994 .
wiles was interviewed for an episode of the bbc documentary series " horizon " that focused on fermat 's last theorem .
this was renamed " the proof " .
his work and life are also described in great detail in simon singh 's popular book " fermat 's last theorem " .
