bandwidth in hertz is a concept in many fields .
a key characteristic of bandwidth is that any band of a given width can carry the same amount of information , regardless of where that band is located in the frequency spectrum .
for example , a 3 khz band can talk whether that band is at basebandarded as in a pots telephone line whereupon or modulated to some higher frequency .
a less strict and more useful definition will mean the frequencies beyond which performance is degraded .
in the case of frequency response , degradation can mean more than 3 db below the maximum value or it could mean below a certain absolute value .
for example , the sampling theorem and the nyquist sampling rate , bandwidth typically refers to baseband bandwidth .
the rayleigh bandwidth of a simple radar pulse is the inverse of its duration .
for example , a one-microsecond pulse has a rayleigh bandwidth of one megahertz .
the essential bandwidth is defined as the portion of a signal spectrum in the frequency domain which contains most of the energy of the signal .
in some contexts , the signal bandwidth in hertz refers to the frequency range in which the signal 's spectral densityference is nonzero or above a small threshold value .
that definition is used in calculations of the lowest sampling rate that will satisfy the sampling theorem .
to say that a system can process signals of that bandwidth , or that the system reduces the bandwidth of a white noise input to that bandwidth .
the 3 db bandwidth of an electronic filter or communication channel is the part of the system 's frequency response .
if the maximum gain is 0 db , the 3 db bandwidth is the frequency range where the gain is more than −3 db , or the attenuation is less than 3 db .
the range of frequencies is also the range of frequencies where the amplitude gain is above 70.7 % of the maximum amplitude gain .
this same " half-power gain " convention is also used in spectral width .
in electronic filter design , a filter specification may require that within the filter passband , the gain is nominally 0 db ± a small number of db , for example within the ±1 db interval .
in the stopbandsovization , the required attenuation in db is above a certain level , for example > 100 db .
if the filter shows amplitude ripple within the passband , the " x " db point refers to the point where the gain is " x " db below the nominal passband gain .
the bandwidth is defined in calculations of the maximum symbol rate , the nyquist sampling rate , and maximum bit rate according to the hartley formula .
for instance , the baseband model of the signal would require a low-pass filter with cutoff frequency of at least formula _ 3 to stay intact , and the physical passband channel would require a passband filter of at least formula _ 2 to stay intact .
in signal processing and control theory , the bandwidth is the frequency at which the closed-loop system gain 3 db below peak .
for a set of criteria is defined to define the extents of the bandwidth , such as input impedance , pattern , or polarization .
"
the theoretical limit to percent bandwidth is 200 % , which occurs for formula _ 8 .
the fractional bandwidth is defined as formula _ 9 .
fractional bandwidth is used for wideband antennas because of the compression of the percent bandwidth that occurs mathematically with percent bandwidths above 100 % .