the great victoria desert is a desert area in western australia and south australia .
the western australia mallee shrub ecoregion is to the west , the little sandy desert to the northwest , the gibson desert and the central ranges xeric shrublands to the north , the tirari and sturt stony deserts to the east , while the nullarbor plain to the south separates it from the southern ocean .
summer daytime temperatures range from 32 to while in winter , this falls to 18 to .
young indigenous adults from the great victoria desert region work in the wilurarra creative programs to keep their culture .
despite its isolated location the great victoria is bisected by very rough tracks including the connie sue highway and the anne beadell highway .
in 1875 , british explorer ernest giles became the first european to cross the desert .
the great victoria desert is a world wildlife fund ecoregion .
as this area has had very limited use for agriculture , habitats remain largely undisturbed while parts of the desert are protected areas including mamungari conservation park .
habitat is also kept in the large aboriginal local government area of anangu pitjantjatjara yankunytjatjara in south australia and in the great victoria desert nature reserve of western australia .
the nuclear weapons trials carried out by the united kingdom at maralinga and emu field in the 1950s and early 1960s have left areas contaminated with plutonium-239 and other radioactive material .
there are few large birds or mammals adapted to these harsh conditions .
there are many small marsupials including the endangered sandhill dunnart " psammophila " and the crest-tailed crauda " dasycell " .
one way to live here is to burrow into the sands .
birds include the chestnut-breasted whiteface © " aphelocephala pectoralis " ⟩ found on the eastern edge of the desert and the malleefowl of mamungari conservation park .
predators of the desert include the dingovial alps , and the desert is north of the dingo fencenna guard .