the great victoria desert is a desert area in western australia and south australia .
the great victoria desert is the largest desert in australia .
it is over 700 km wideinga from west to east .
the western australia mallee shrub ecoregion is to the west , the little sandy desert to the northwest , the gibson desert and the central ranges xeric shrublands to the north , the tirari and sturt stony deserts to the east , while the nullarbor plain to the south separates it from the southern ocean .
average annual rainfall is low and irregular .
thunderstorms are common in the great victoria desert .
summer daytime temperatures range from 32 to while in winter , this falls to 18 to .
the majority of people living in the region are indigenous australians from different groups including the mirning and the pitjantjatjara .
it is the most populous and healthy indigenous population of australia .
there have been many aboriginal populations in this region .
young indigenous adults from the great victoria desert region work in the wilurarra creative programs to keep their culture .
despite its isolated location the great victoria is bisected by very rough tracks including the connie sue highway and the anne beadell highway .
human activity has included mining and nuclear weapons testing .
in 1875 , british explorer ernest giles became the first european to cross the desert .
he named the desert after the british monarch , queen victoria .
in 1891 , david lindsey 's trip traveled across this area from north to south .
frank hann was looking for gold in this area between 1903 and 1908 .
len beadell explored the area in the 1960s .
the great victoria desert is a world wildlife fund ecoregion .
as this area has had very limited use for agriculture , habitats remain largely undisturbed while parts of the desert are protected areas including mamungari conservation park .
habitat is also kept in the large aboriginal local government area of anangu pitjantjatjara yankunytjatjara in south australia and in the great victoria desert nature reserve of western australia .
the nuclear weapons trials carried out by the united kingdom at maralinga and emu field in the 1950s and early 1960s have left areas contaminated with plutonium-239 and other radioactive material .
only the hardiest of plants can survive in much of this environment .
between the sand ridges there are areas of wooded steppe consisting of " eucalyptus gongylocarpa " , " eucalyptus gongylocarpa " , " eucalyptus youngiana " and mulga " acacia aneurabilis " shrubs .
there are few large birds or mammals adapted to these harsh conditions .
there are many small marsupials including the endangered sandhill dunnart " psammophila " and the crest-tailed crauda " dasycell " .
one way to live here is to burrow into the sands .
birds include the chestnut-breasted whiteface © " aphelocephala pectoralis " ⟩ found on the eastern edge of the desert and the malleefowl of mamungari conservation park .
predators of the desert include the dingovial alps , and the desert is north of the dingo fencenna guard .
