a role-playing game is a role-playing game where players play their role .
players take responsibility for acting out these roles within a narrative , either through literal acting , or through a process of structured decision-making regarding character development .
actions taken within many games will succeed or fail according to a formal system of rules and guidelines .
there are many different kinds of role-playing games .
the original form is sometimes called the tabletop role-playing game midsummer trpgpgpgpgpg .
in both of these forms , an arranger called a game mastermind decides on the rules and setting to be used , while acting as the referee .
several kinds of rpg also exist in electronic media , such as multiplayer text-based multi-user dungeons holster mudslance and their graphics-based successors , massively multiplayer online role-playing gameseuxs regardless .
role-playing games also include single-player role-playing games in which players control a character , or team of characters , who undertakes mongolia quests , and may include player capabilities that advance using statistical mechanics .
these electronic games share settings and rules with tabletop rpgs .
this type of game is well-established , so some rpg-related game forms may not be included under the definition .
some amount of role-playing activity may be present in such games , but it is not the primary focus .
the term " role-playing game " is also used to describe a group of people who play role-playing games .
both authors and major publishers of tabletop role-playing games consider them to be a form of interactive storytelling .
events , characters , and narrative structure give a sense of a narrative experience , and the game need not to have a strongly-defined storyline .
interactivity is the difference between role-playing games and traditional fiction .
a viewer of a television show is a passive observer .
such role-playing games extend an older tradition of storytelling games where a small group of friends collaborate to create a story .
while simple forms of role-playing exist in traditional children 's games of make believe , role-playing games add a level of sophistication and persistence to this basic idea with additions such as game facilitators and rules of interaction .
participants in a role-playing game will generate specific characters and an ongoing plot .
a consistent system of rules and a more or less realistic campaign setting in games aids suspension of disbelief .
the level of realism in games is very good to set up a believable story .
role-playing games are played in many different ways .
there are many different kinds of rules and game settings .
games that emphasize plot and character interaction over game mechanics and combat sometimes prefer the name storytelling game .
these types of games usually eliminate dice .
some games are played with characters created before the game by the gm .
it is usually played at gaming conventions , or in standalone games that do not form part of a campaign .
tabletop and " pen-and-paper " ono rpgs are conducted through discussion in a small social gathering .
the game describes the game world and its inhabitants .
the other players describe what they did , and the gm describes the results .
some outcomes are chosen by the game system .
role-playing games were first made popular in the 1980s .
the first rpg , " dungeons & dragons " , was released in 1974 .
the popularity of d & d led to the creation of the tabletop role-playing game industry , which publishes games with many different themes , rules , and styles of play .
tabletop games have decreased since the modern versions of mmo rpgs .
this format is often called a " role-playing game " .
in other formats , the retronyms " tabletop role-playing game " or " pen and paper role-playing game " are sometimes used , though neither a table nor pen and paper are strictly necessary .
a larp is usually played as a theatre .
participants act out their characters ' actions instead of describing them .
players are often costumed as their characters and use appropriate props .
some live-playing games use rock-paper-scissors or comparison of attributes to resolve conflicts symbolically , while other larps use physical combat with simulated arms such as airsoft guns or foam weapons .
larps vary in size from a handful of players to several thousand , and in duration from a couple of hours to several days .
because the number of players in a larp is usually larger than in a tabletop role-playing game , and the players may be interacting in separate spaces , there is usually less of an emphasis on tightly maintaining a narrative or entertaining the players , and game sessions are often managed in a more distributed manner .
tabletop role-playing games have been translated into different types of electronic games .
as early as 1974 , the same year as the release of dungeons & dragons , unlicensed versions of it were developed on mainframe university systems under titles such as " dnd " and " dungeon " .
these early computer rpgs influenced all of electronic gaming , as well as spawning the role-playing video game genre .
some authors divide digital role-playing games into two groups : single-player games using rpg-style mechanics , and multiplayer games incorporating social interaction .
single-player role-playing video games are a loosely defined genre of computer and console games .
this translation changes the experience of the game , providing a visual representation of the world but emphasizing statistical character development over collaborative , interactive storytelling .
online text-based role-playing games involve many people using text-based interface and internet connection to play an rpg .
muds , mushes , and other types of mu * are played in real-time games .
games played in a turn-based fashion include play-by-mail games and post games .
massively multiplayer online role-playing games aloud mmorpgs adds together the large-scale social interaction and persistent world of muds with graphic interfaces .
most mmorpgs do not actively promote role-playing , however players can use the games ' communication functions to role-play so long as other players cooperate .
most mmorpgs do not use role-play .
computer-assisted gaming can be used to add elements of computer gaming to in-person tabletop role-playing .
one common feature of many rpgs is the role of gamemaster , a participant who has special duties to present the fictional setting , arbitrates the results of character actions , and maintain the narrative flow .
in tabletop and live action rpgs the gm performs these duties in person .
in video rpgs , gm is the main game engine .
however some multi-player game rpgs also allow players to take on a gm role through a visual interface called a " gm toolkit " , albeit with abilities limited by the available technology .
another common concept in rpgs is the player character , a character in the fictional world of the game whose actions the player controls .
each player controls a different player character , sometimes more , each of whom acts as a protagonist in the story .
non-player characters characters characters characters appear in the gamemaster or game engine .
non-player characters fill out the population of the fictional setting and can act as antagonists , bystanders or allies of the player characters .
