amos won a full scholarship to the peabody institute at johns hopkins university at the age of five .
she was expelled at the age of 11 for what " rolling stone " described as “ musical insubordination ” .
she was the lead singer of the short lived 1980s pop group y kant tori read .
when she was two years old , her family moved to baltimore , maryland .
her older brother and sister took piano lessons , but tori did not need them .
amos said that she lost the scholarship because of her interest in rock and popular music .
she co-wrote " baltimore " with her brother mike amos for a competition involving the baltimore orioles .
the song did not win the contest but became her first single .
she had performed under her middle name , ellen .
by the time she was 17 , amos had a stock of homemade demo tapes that her father regularly sent out to record companies and producers .
producer narada michael walden responded favorably : he and amos cut some tracks together , but none were released .
eventually , atlantic records responded to one of the tapes , and when a & r man jason flom flew to baltimore to audition her in person , the label was convinced and signed her .
she moved to los angeles in 1984 .
the band went through several times of songwriting and recording .
in the credits , the song is said to be a band called tess makes good .
the album was reworked and expanded under the guidance of doug morris and the musical talents of steve caton , eric rosse , will macgregor , carlo nuccio , and dan nebenzal .
" little earthquakes " was released in the united states in february 1992 .
she went to new mexico with her partner eric rosse in 1993 .
the album received favorable reviews and sold enough copies to chart at number one .
some critics liked its intensity and uniqueness while others bemoaned its comparative impenetrability .
" boys for pele " is amos 's most successful transatlantic release , reaching no . 1 .
she had the barn of her home in cornwall changed into the state-of-the-art recording studio of martian engineering studios .
amos 's acoustic , piano-based sound has largely replaced with arrangements that include electronica and dance music with vocal washes .
the album is about womanhood and amos miscarriages and marriage .
the sales for " from the choirgirl hotel " are amos 's best to date , selling 153,000 copies in the first week .
" to venus and back " received mostly positive reviews .
amos decided to record a cover album .
the album is amos ' first concept album .
amos later said that a stimulus for the album was to end her contract with atlantic without giving them original songs .
in 2001 , tori released her atlantic contract .
the album explores amos ' alter ego , scarlet , intertwined with her cross-country concert tour following 9 / 11 .
she was not until 2003 when polly anthony resigned as president of epic records .
she was one of the reasons amos signed with the label .
in 1997 , tori released her first album " further trouble " , which was a success for her label epic / sony music entertainment .
through extensive study , amos also wove in the stories of the gnostic gospels and the removal of women from a position of power within the christian church to create an album based largely on religion and politics .
5 on the " billboard " 200 album charts , placing her in an elite group of women who have got five or more top 10 albums in the us .
while the newly merged label was present throughout the production process of " the beekeeper " , amos and her crew nearly completed her next project , " american doll posse " , before inviting the label to listen to it .
" american doll posse " is a concept album .
during her time with epic records , amos also released a collection of songs called " tales of a librarian " — 2003 syndication through her former label , atlantic records .
in may 2008 , tori said that she had an end to her contract with epic records .
in september of that same year , she released a live album and dvd , " live at montreux 1991 / 1992 " , through eagle rock entertainment .
in december , after a chance encounter with doug morris , amos decided to sign a " joint venture " deal with universal republic records .
her first album , " abnormally attracted to sin " , was released in 2009 .
" abnormally attracted to sin " , admitted amos , is a " personal album " , not a conceptual one , with the album exploring themes of power , boundaries , and the subjective view of sin .
in november of that same year , she released her first album , " midwinter graces " .
the album has reworked versions of traditional carols , as well as original songs by tori .
during her contract with the label , tori recorded vocals for two songs for david byrne 's collaboration album with fatboy slim , titled " here lies love " , which was released in april 2010 .
in july of the same year , tori amos-live from the artists den was released exclusively through barnes & noble .
the limited edition set included a signature edition lomography diana f + camera , along with two lenses , a roll of film and one of five photographs taken of amos during her time in moscow .
in september 2011 , tori released her first classical-style music album , " night of hunters " .
in 1993 , tori released her first album " little earthquakes " .
in 2012 she made her own record label , transmission galactic .
in an interview that she will release her first album in 2014 .
in 2013 , amos released her musical project , " the light princess " .
the light princess and its lead actress , rosalie craig , were nominated for best musical performance at the evening standard award .
in sydney , amos performed two orchestral concerts .
the song was a " return to her identity " following a series of more classically-inspired and innovative musical projects of the last four years .
it is both one further step in the artistic evolution of one of the most influential artists of her generation , and a return to the inspiring and personal music that amos is known for all around the world .
the recording also includes two songs from the musicaliste " highness in the sky " and " darkest hour " performed by amos .
in 2016 , tori released a deluxe version of the album boys for pele .
in the summer of 2017 , tori released three songs from her album : " cloud riders " , " up the creek " and " reindeer king " .
it was produced by amos and was produced by phil amos .
the initial inspiration for the album came from a trip that amos took to the great smoky mountainshend tennessee-north carolina belonged to the home of her native american ancestors .
amos was shocked by both events .
the standard version has 13 songs , while the deluxe edition adds two extra songs to the tracklist : " upside down 2 " and " russia " .
the book 's subject is amos 's interest in mythology and religion .
the book was made by editor rantz hoseley , who worked with amos to gather 80 different artists for the book .
amos and her music have been the subject of numerous official and unofficial books , as well as academic critiques .
tori amos : in the studio "tify 2011 ” by jake brown .
early in her professional career , she became a fan after she talked to him in the song " tear in your hand " and also in print interviews .
although created before the two met , the character delirium from gaiman 's " the sandman " series is inspired by amos .
gaiman is godfather to her daughter .
in 2019 , tori sang the british standard " a nightingale sang in berkeley square " .
in june 1994 , the rape , abuse & incest national network robbed-free support line in the u . s . connecting callers with their local rape crisis center was founded .
she was the first national spokesperson for the organization .
she has performed more than 1,000 shows since her first world tour in 1992 .
in 2003 , tori was voted fifth best touring act by the readers of " rolling stone " magazine .
