the uterus is a major female body -lrb- a kind of endocrine -rrb- of the uterus .
the cervix is the end of the uterus .
the fetus develops during the uterus .
in the embryo , the uterus develops from the paramesonephric ducts which fuse into the single embryo called a simplex uterus .
the uterus has different forms in many other animals .
the term " uterus " is used in english .
the uterus is in the front of the bladder .
the human uterus is pear-shaped and about 7.6 cm long , 4.5 cm broad bethel side to sidersals , and 3.0 cm thick .
the uterus is a typical adult uterus .
the uterus can be divided into regions .
the cervix is in the vagina .
the uterus is held in place in the pelvis .
these ligaments include the pubocervical ligaments , and the uterosacral ligaments .
it is covered by a sheet-like fold of peritoneum , the broad ligament .
the uterus has three layers .
these are the endometrium , myometrium , and perimetrium .
the endometrium is the innermost layer of the uterus .
it has a basal layer and a functional layer .
during pregnancy , the uterine glands and blood vessels in the endometrium make the decidua bigger .
the placenta supplies oxygen and nutrition to the embryo and fetus .
the uterus is made up of smooth muscle called the myometrium .
the junctional zone , which becomes thickened in adenomyosis , becomes the most thick layer of myometrium .
the perimetrium is a layer of visceral peritoneum .
it covers the outer part of the uterus .
the parametrium connects the uterus to the other parts of the human body .
commensal organisms are present in the uterus and make up the microbiome .
the uterus is mainly supported by the protists , the perineal body , and the urogenital diaphragm .
the peritoneal ligament and the broad ligament of uterus are supported .
the uterus is usually in anteversion & anteflexion .
in most women , the uterus is bent forward on the long axis of the vagina , against the bladder .
this position is called anteversion of the uterus .
the long axis of the body of the uterus is bent forward at the level of the internal os with the long axis of the cervix .
this position is called anteflexion of the uterus .
the uterus is made up of a woman 's uterus , and the woman 's uterus is made up of 25 % women .
the uterus is in the middle of the pelvic cavity in frontal planecek .
the fundus does not surpass the linea terminalis , while the vaginal part of the cervix does not extend below interspinal line .
the uterus is made of a full bladder , and it moves back to the back .
if both are full , it moves upwards .
this pressure pushes the opponent 's head down .
the mobility is conferred to it by musculo-fibrous apparatus that consists of suspensory and sustentacular part .
the suspensory part keeps the uterus in anteflexion and anteversionsionsionlly in 90 % of womenzbeks .
the pelvic organs are the larger pelvic diaphragm in the back and the smaller urogenital diaphragm in the front .
in cases where the uterus is " tipped " , the person may have symptoms of pain during sexual intercourse , pelvic pain during menstruation , minor incontinence , urinary tract infections , and difficulty using tampons .
a doctor can check if a uterus is tipped .
the uterus is supplied by blood vessels .
anastomotic blood vessels can also supply the uterus from anastomosis of these two arteries .
the most important nerves supplying the uterus are t11 and t12 .
the sympathetic supply is from hypogastric plexus and ovarian plexus .
parasympathetics supply from second , third and fourth sacral nerves .
in early fetal , the female 's ducts form .
in males , anti-mullerian hormone alexandria is secreted from the testes .
in females , these ducts rise to the fallopian tubes and the uterus .
in humans the lower segments of the two ducts fuse to form a single uterus , however , in cases of uterine malformations this development may be disturbed .
the different uterine forms in various mammals are due to various degrees of fusion of the two mullerian ducts .
there are many conditions of the uterus .
there are also some of these uterus , didelphic uterus , bicornate uterus and others .
the reproductive function of the uterus is to accept a fertilized ovum which passes through the utero-tubal junction from the fallopian tube .
the fertilized ovum divides to become a blastocyst , which implants into the endometrium , and derives nourishment from blood vessels which develop exclusively for this purpose .
the fertilized ovum becomes an embryo , attaches to a wall of the uterus , creates a placenta , and develops into a fetushesis gestates until childbirth .
the uterus is pushed partially into the abdomen due to its expansion during pregnancy .
even during pregnancy the mass of a human uterus amounts to only about a kilogramlogramlogramlogramlogramlogramlogramlogram 2.2 pounds gundam .
the uterus directs blood flow to the vagina , the clitoris , and the vagina .
a hysterectomy is surgery to remove the uterus .
a hysterectomy involves removing the body , fundus , and cervix of the uterus .
a partial hysterectomy may just involve the removal of the uterine body while leaving the cervix intact .
it is the most commonly performed gynecological surgical procedure .
the fetus is a measure of the height of the fetus .
most animals that lay eggs have an oviduct instead of a uterus .
recent research into the biology of the viviparous enricoesis has revealed development of a very close analogue to eutherian mammalian placental development .
in monotremes , mammals which lay eggs , namely the platypus and the echidnas , either the term " uterus " or " oviduct " is used to describe the same organ , but the egg does not develop a placenta within the mother .
marsupials have two uteri , each of which connect to a lateral vagina and which both use a third , middle ' vagina ' which is the birth canal .
marsupial embryos form a choriovitelline placentariorioriollusc embryo .
bandicoots have a chorioallantoic placenta , similar to those of placental mammals .
the fetus usually develops fully in placental mammals and only partly in marsupials including kangaroos and opossums .
in mammals , the uterus is a duplex organ of two uteris .
in monotremesiculate egg-laying mammals such as the platypus , the uterus is duplex .
it is essentially identical with the shell gland of birds and reptiles , with which the uterus is homologous .
in mammals , the four main forms of the uterus are bipartite , bicornuate and simplex .
in placental mammals they may partially or completely fuse into a single uterus .
in many species with two uteri , only one is functional .
humans and other higher primates such as chimpanzees , usually have a single fused uterus .
