a creation mythologies is a symbolic narrative of how the world began and how people first came to live .
while in popular usage , the term " myth " often refers to false or fanciful stories , members of cultures often ascribe varying degrees of truth to their creation myths .
in society in which it is told , a creation myth is usually shown as conveying profound truths , metaphorically , symbolically and sometimes in a historical or literal sense .
they are often , although not always , considered cosmogonical myths .
creation myths often share a number of features .
they often are considered sacred accounts .
they are all stories with a plot and characters who are either deities , human-like figures , or animals , who often speak and transform easily .
they are often set in a dim and non-religious past that historian mircea eliade termed " in illo tempore " aarhus ' at that time '
creation myths talk about the central worldview and the framework for the self-identity of the culture and individual in a universal context .
creation myths develop in oral traditions and so typically have multiple versions .
it tells the story of a fabled time of the " beginnings " .
in other words , myth tells how a reality came into existence , be it the whole of reality , the cosmos , or only a fragment of reality – an island , a species of plant , a particular kind of human behavior , an institution .
all creation myths are in one sense because they try to explain how the world was formed and where humanity came from .
myths try to explain the unknown and sometimes teach a lesson .
ethnologists and anthropologists who study these myths say that in the modern context theologians try to discern humanity 's meaning from revealed truths and scientists investigate cosmology with the tools of empiricism and rationality , but creation myths define human reality in very different terms .
historians of religion and other students of myth thought of them as forms of primitive or early-stage science or religion and analyzed them in a literal or logical sense .
today , they are seen as symbolic narratives .
charles long writes , " the beings referred to in the myth – gods , animals , plants – are forms of power held by the existentially .
the myths should not be understood as attempts to work out a rational explanation of god . "
creation myths are not literal explications .
they are the basis of a worldview that guides how people relate to the natural world , to any assumed spiritual world , and to each other .
the creation myth is a cornerstone for distinguishing reality from reality , the origin and nature of being from non-being .
in this sense they serve as a philosophy of life but one expressed and conveyed through symbol rather than systematic reason .
they go beyond etiological myths .
creation myths also help to orient human beings in the world .
each beginning seems to come before an earlier beginning .
instead of meeting a single starting point , we encounter an infinity of them , each of which poses the same problem .
. . . there are no solutions to this dilemma .
what we have to find is not a solution .
the words we reach for , from god to gravity , are inadequate to the task .
so we have to use language poetically or symbolically .
mythologists have applied various ways to classify creation myths found throughout human cultures .
eliade and his colleague charles long developed a classification based on some common motifs that reappearear in stories the world over .
marta weigle further developed and refined this typology to highlight nine themes .
the idea that god created the world out of nothing is central today to judaism , christianity and islam , and the medieval jewish philosopher maimonides felt it was the only concept that the three religions shared .
nonetheless , the idea is not found in the entire hebrew bible .
the authors of genesis 1 were concerned not with the origins of matter exceeding the material which god formed into the habitable cosmos percival .
by the beginning of the third century , people thought that the idea of world-formation and the omnipotence of god was a fundamental tenet of christian theology .
the creation of the first prophet " ex nihilo " is found in ancient egypt , the rig veda , and many animistic cultures in africa , asia , oceania and north america .
the debate between sheep and grain is an example of an even earlier form of " ex nihilo " creation myth from ancient sumer .
in most of these stories the world is brought into being by the speech , dream , breath , or pure thought of a creator but creation ex nihilo may also take place through a creator 's bodily secretions .
the literal translation of the phrase " ex nihilo " is " from nothing " but in many creation myths the line is blurred whether the creative act would be made " ex nihilo " or creation from chaos .
in " ex nihilo " , there are many things that can be found in the universe .
such a creator may or may not be existing in physical surroundings such as darkness or water , but does not create the world from them , whereas in creation from chaos the substance used for creation is pre-existing within the void .
in creation from chaos myth , there is nothing but a formless , shapeless , and no expanse .
in these stories the word " chaos " means " disorder " .
chaos may be described as having the consistency of vapour or water , dimensionless , and sometimes salty or muddy .
these myths associate chaos with evil and oblivion , in contrast to " order " ¿ " cosmos " everything .
the act of creation is the bringing of order from disorder .
one example is the genesis creation myth from the first chapter of the book of genesis .
there are two types of world parent myths .
the creation of the primeval is an eternal union of two parents .
the two parents are usually identified as skymind .
these myths often depict creation as the result of a sexual union .
in the second form of world parent myth , creation itself springs from parts of the body of the primeval being .
in these stories , the limbs , hair , bones or organs of the primeval are somehow severed or sacrificed to transform into sky , animal or plant life , and other worldly features .
these myths tend to emphasize creative forces as animistic in nature rather than sexual .
one example of this is the norse creation myth described in " gylfaginning " exactly in the poem voluspa .
in emergence myths humanity emerges from another world into the one they currently live .
the previous world is often considered the womb of the earth mother .
the role of midwife is usually played by a female deity .
male characters rarely figure into these stories , and scholars often consider them in counterpoint to male-oriented creation myths , like those of the " ex nihilo " variety .
emergence myths often describe the creation of people and / or supernatural beings as a staged ascent or metamorphosis from nascent forms through a series of subterranean worlds to arrive at their current place and form .
often the passage from one world or stage to the next is impelled by inner forces , a process of gestation or gestation from earlier embryonic forms .
the genre is most commonly found in native american cultures .
the earth-diver is a character in several myths .
in these stories a supreme being sends an animal into the waters to build a habitable land .
some scholars interpret these myths psychologically while others interpret them cosmogonically .
in both cases emphasis is placed on beginnings emanating from the depths .
earth-diver myths are common in native american folklore .
they have a common origin in the eastern asiatic region .
characteristic of many native american myths , earth-diver creation stories begin as beings and potential forms linger asleep or suspended in the primordial realm .
the earth-diver is among the first of them to awaken and lay the necessary groundwork by building suitable lands where the coming creation will be able to live .
in many cases , these stories describe a series of failed attempts to make land before the solution is found .
