a creation mythologies is a symbolic narrative of how the world began and how people first came to live .
while in popular usage , the term " myth " often refers to false or fanciful stories , members of cultures often ascribe varying degrees of truth to their creation myths .
they are all stories with a plot and characters who are either deities , human-like figures , or animals , who often speak and transform easily .
they are often set in a dim and non-religious past that historian mircea eliade termed " in illo tempore " aarhus ' at that time '
creation myths talk about the central worldview and the framework for the self-identity of the culture and individual in a universal context .
in other words , myth tells how a reality came into existence , be it the whole of reality , the cosmos , or only a fragment of reality – an island , a species of plant , a particular kind of human behavior , an institution .
all creation myths are in one sense because they try to explain how the world was formed and where humanity came from .
ethnologists and anthropologists who study these myths say that in the modern context theologians try to discern humanity 's meaning from revealed truths and scientists investigate cosmology with the tools of empiricism and rationality , but creation myths define human reality in very different terms .
historians of religion and other students of myth thought of them as forms of primitive or early-stage science or religion and analyzed them in a literal or logical sense .
today , they are seen as symbolic narratives .
charles long writes , " the beings referred to in the myth – gods , animals , plants – are forms of power held by the existentially .
in this sense they serve as a philosophy of life but one expressed and conveyed through symbol rather than systematic reason .
creation myths also help to orient human beings in the world .
instead of meeting a single starting point , we encounter an infinity of them , each of which poses the same problem .
. . . there are no solutions to this dilemma .
eliade and his colleague charles long developed a classification based on some common motifs that reappearear in stories the world over .
the idea that god created the world out of nothing is central today to judaism , christianity and islam , and the medieval jewish philosopher maimonides felt it was the only concept that the three religions shared .
the authors of genesis 1 were concerned not with the origins of matter exceeding the material which god formed into the habitable cosmos percival .
by the beginning of the third century , people thought that the idea of world-formation and the omnipotence of god was a fundamental tenet of christian theology .
the debate between sheep and grain is an example of an even earlier form of " ex nihilo " creation myth from ancient sumer .
in most of these stories the world is brought into being by the speech , dream , breath , or pure thought of a creator but creation ex nihilo may also take place through a creator 's bodily secretions .
the literal translation of the phrase " ex nihilo " is " from nothing " but in many creation myths the line is blurred whether the creative act would be made " ex nihilo " or creation from chaos .
such a creator may or may not be existing in physical surroundings such as darkness or water , but does not create the world from them , whereas in creation from chaos the substance used for creation is pre-existing within the void .
in creation from chaos myth , there is nothing but a formless , shapeless , and no expanse .
chaos may be described as having the consistency of vapour or water , dimensionless , and sometimes salty or muddy .
one example is the genesis creation myth from the first chapter of the book of genesis .
the creation of the primeval is an eternal union of two parents .
these myths often depict creation as the result of a sexual union .
in the second form of world parent myth , creation itself springs from parts of the body of the primeval being .
in these stories , the limbs , hair , bones or organs of the primeval are somehow severed or sacrificed to transform into sky , animal or plant life , and other worldly features .
these myths tend to emphasize creative forces as animistic in nature rather than sexual .
one example of this is the norse creation myth described in " gylfaginning " exactly in the poem voluspa .
male characters rarely figure into these stories , and scholars often consider them in counterpoint to male-oriented creation myths , like those of the " ex nihilo " variety .
emergence myths often describe the creation of people and / or supernatural beings as a staged ascent or metamorphosis from nascent forms through a series of subterranean worlds to arrive at their current place and form .
often the passage from one world or stage to the next is impelled by inner forces , a process of gestation or gestation from earlier embryonic forms .
in these stories a supreme being sends an animal into the waters to build a habitable land .
characteristic of many native american myths , earth-diver creation stories begin as beings and potential forms linger asleep or suspended in the primordial realm .
the earth-diver is among the first of them to awaken and lay the necessary groundwork by building suitable lands where the coming creation will be able to live .
in many cases , these stories describe a series of failed attempts to make land before the solution is found .