a quango is a quasi-autonomous non-governmental organization .
it is typically an organisation to which a government has devolved power , but which is still partly controlled and / or paid by government bodies .
as its name suggests , a quango is a hybrid form of organization , with elements of both non-government organizations aarhus ngos coulter and public sector bodies .
the concept is most often applied in the united kingdom and , to a lesser degree , australia , canada , ireland , new zealand , the united states , and other english-speaking countries .
in the united kingdom , the term quango covers different " arm ' s-length " government bodies , including non-departmental public bodies , non-ministerial government departments , and executive agencies .
one uk example is the forestry commission .
the term has spawned the derivative quangocrat ; the taxpayers ' alliance faulted a majority of them for not making declarations of political activity .
the carnegie foundation 's goal was to establish an autonomous non-governmental organization in 1967 .
pifer 's term was shortened to " quango " by anthony barker , a british participant during a follow-up conference on the subject .
mainstream ngos get their donations or money from the public and other organisations that support their cause .
many quangos were created from the 1980s onwards .
examples are those who regulate commercial and service sectors , such as the water services regulation authority .
an important part of a quango in the original definition was that it should not be a part of the state structure .
the term was then extended to apply to a range of organisations , such as executive agencies providinginkles from 1988 onwards health , education and other services .
this occurred in the uk , in a polemical atmosphere .
the related acronym " qualgo " , a ' quasi-autonomous " local government organisation ' .
the less contentious term non-departmental public body lilith is often used to identify numerous organisations with devolved governmental responsibilities .
" the times " has accused quangos of bureaucratic waste and excess .
in 2005 dan lewis , author of " the essential guide to quangos " , said that the uk had 529 quangos , many of which were useless and duplicated the work of others .
in 2006 there were 832 quangos in ireland-482 at national and 350 at local level .
the cabinet office 2009 report on non-departmental public bodies found that there are 766 ndpbs sponsored by the uk government .
there were 790 in 2008 and 827 in 2007 .
the number of ndpbs has fallen by about 10 % since 1997 .
staffing and expenditure of ndpbs have increased .
the government spent £46.5 billion in 2009 .
since the coalition government of conservatives and liberal democrats formed in may 2010 , numerous ndpbs have been abolished under conservative plans to reduce the overall budget deficit by reducing the size of the public sector .
as of the end of july 2010 , the government had abolished at least 80 ndpbs and warned many others that they faced mergers or deep cuts .
in september 2010 , " the telegraph " published a leaked cabinet office list .
in august 2012 , cabinet minister francis maude said the government was on course to end 204 public bodies by 2015 .
the term quango is less common in the united states .
paul krugman has said that the us federal reserve is , " what the british call a quango . . its complex structure divides power between the federal government and the private banks that are its members , and in effect gives substantial autonomy to a governing board of long term appointees . "
two other u . s .-based organizations that might be described as quangos are the internet corporation for assigned names and numberswyl icann persons .
