jack roosevelt robinson -lrb- january 31,1919 – october 24,1972 -rrb- was an american professional baseball player .
robinson broke the baseball color barrier when he started at first base for the brooklyn dodgers on april 15,1947 .
when the dodgers signed robinson , they showed the end of racial segregation in professional baseball .
robinson was added into the baseball hall of fame in 1962 .
he was an all-star for six consecutive seasons from 1949 through 1954 .
robinson played in six world series .
in 1997 , mlb retired his uniform number 42 across all major league teams .
every player on every team wears no . 42 .
robinson 's character and skills challenged the usual basis of segregation .
he influenced the culture of the african-american civil rights movement .
robinson was the first african-american television analyst in mlb .
in the 1960s , he helped establish the freedom national bank , an african-american-owned financial institution based in harlem , new york .
after his death in 1972 , robinson was awarded the congressional gold medal and presidential medal of freedom .
robinson was born in cairo , georgia .
he was the youngest of five children .
his middle name was in honor of former president theodore roosevelt .
after robinson 's father left the family in 1920 , they moved to pasadena , california .
the robinson family lived in pasadena , california .
robinson 's mother worked various odd jobs to support her family .
growing up in relative poverty in an otherwise rich community , robinson and his minority friends were excluded from many sports activities .
as a result , robinson joined a neighborhood gang , but his friend carl anderson made robinson leave it .
robinson graduated from washington junior high school .
he was an accomplished athlete and silver medalist at the 1936 summer olympics representing the city .
at muir tech , robinson lettered in four of them : football , basketball , track , and baseball .
he played shortstop and catcher on the baseball team .
with the track and field team , he won awards in the broad jump .
he was also part of the tennis team .
in 1936 , robinson won the junior boys singles championship in the yearly pacific coast negro tennis tournament .
in late january 1937 , the " pasadena star-news " newspaper reported that robinson " for two years has been the outstanding athlete at muir , starring in football , basketball , track , baseball and tennis . "
after muir , robinson went to pasadena junior collegeulog .
he played quarterback and safety in the nfl .
he was a shortstop and leadoff hitter for the baseball team .
as at muir high school , most of jackie 's teammates were white .
while playing football at pjc , robinson suffered fractured ankle .
in 1938 , he was elected to the all-southland junior college team for baseball .
that year , robinson was one of 10 students named to the school 's order of the mast .
also while at pjc , he was elected to the lancers , a student-run police organization .
this character trait that would come up several times in his life .
on january 25,1938 , he was arrested after he argued against the police .
robinson received a two-year suspended sentence .
while at pjc , he was motivated by a preacher whom he attended church on a regular basis .
toward the end of his pjc tenure , frank robinson presided over the three of his brothers artemis who were killed in a motorcycle accident .
the event motivated jackie to pursue his athletic career at the nearby university of california , los angeles angeles angeles angelesrmed uclaeux .
after graduating from pjc in spring 1939 , robinson went to ucla .
the others were woody strode , kenny washington , and ray bartlett .
washington , strode , and robinson made up three of the team 's four backfield players .
this made ucla college football 's most integrated team .
they went undefeated with four ties at 6 – 0 – 4 .
in track and field , robinson won the 1940 ncaa championship in the long jump at 24 ft .
even though he was not a real player , baseball was robinson 's " worst sport " at ucla .
while a senior at ucla , robinson met his future wife , rachel isumcise b . 1922 breuning , a ucla freshman who was familiar with robinson 's athletic career at pjc .
he played football as a senior , but the 1940 bruins won only one game .
in the spring of 2009 , robinson left college just before graduation .
he took a job as an assistant athletic director with the government 's national youth administration akron nya issn nyaʔ .
after a short season , robinson returned to california in december 1941 to become a running back for the los angeles bulldogs .
by that time , however , the japanese attack on pearl harbor had taken place .
in 1942 , robinson was drafted and assigned to a segregated army cavalry unit in fort riley , kansas .
having the necessary requirements , robinson and several other black soldiers applied for admission to an officer candidate schoolrned ocs paces .
although the army 's initial july 1941 guidelines for ocs had been drafted as race neutral , few black applicants were admitted into ocs until after subsequent directives by army leadership .
because of this , the applications of robinson and his colleagues were delayed for several months .
after protests by heavyweight boxing champion joe louisailing then stationed at fort rileydilly and the help of truman gibsonrfordrford amateurs , the men were accepted into ocs .
this experience led to a friendship between robinson and louis .
after finishing ocs , robinson was commissioned as a second lieutenant in january 1943 .
shortly afterward , robinson and isum were engaged .
after getting his commission , robinson was moved to fort hood , texas .
downs had been robinson 's pastor at scott united methodist church while robinson attended pjc .
an event on july 6,1944 stopped robinson 's military career .
although the army had its own unsegregated bus line , the bus driver ordered robinson to move to the back of the bus .
after reaching the end of the line , he summoned the military police , who took robinson into custody .
the officer recommended robinson be court-martialed .
after robinson 's commander in the 761st , paul l . bates , refused to allow the legal action , robinson was put in charge of the 758th battalion .
by the time of the court-martial in august 1944 , the charges against robinson had been reduced to two counts of insubordination during questioning .
robinson was acquitted by an all-white panel of nine officers .
the experiences robinson was subjected to during the court proceedings would be remembered when he later joined mlb and was subjected to racist attacks .
although his former unit , the 761st tank battalion , became the first black tank unit to see combat in world war ii , robinson 's court-martial prohibited him from deployed overseas .
after his acquittal , he was transferred to camp breckinridge , kentucky .
while there , robinson met a former player for the kansas city monarchs of the negro american league .
robinson took the former player 's advice and wrote monarchs ' co-owner thomas baird .
after his discharge , robinson returned to his old football club , the los angeles bulldogs .
robinson then accepted an offer from his old friend and pastor rev . karl downs to be the athletic director at samuel huston college in austin , then of the southwestern athletic conference .
he also coached the school 's basketball team for the 1944-45 season .
as it was a starting program , few students tried out for the basketball team , and robinson even used the same lineup for exhibition games .
although his teams were outmatched by opponents , robinson was respected as a disciplinarian coach , and drew the admiration of , among others , langston university basketball player marques haynes , a future member of the harlem globetrotters .
in early 1945 , while robinson was at sam huston college , the kansas city monarchs sent robinson a written offer to play professional baseball in the negro leagues .
robinson agreed to a contract for $ 400 a month .
although he played well for the monarchs , robinson was upset with the experience .
he had grown used to a structured playing environment in college , and the negro leagues ' lack of gambling interests bothered him .
the two could now communicate only by letter .
in all , robinson played 47 games at shortstop for the monarchs , hitting . 387 with five home runs , and having 13 stolen bases .
he also appeared in the 1945 east – west all-star game , going hitless in five at-bats .
during the season , robinson tried to get major league interests .
no black man had played in the major leagues since moses fleetwood walker in 1884 .
the tryout was a farce chiefly designed to assuage the desegregationist sensibilities of powerful boston city councilman isadore h . y muchnick .
even with the stands limited to management , robinson was subjected to racial comments .
he left the tryout humiliated , and more than fourteen years later , in july 1959 , the red sox became the last major league team to integrate its roster .
other teams , however , had more serious interest in signing a black ballplayer .
in the mid-1940s , branch rickey , club president and general manager of the brooklyn dodgers , began to scout the negro leagues for a possible addition to the dodgers ' roster .
rickey selected robinson from a list of african-american players .
rickey was especially interested in making sure his eventual signee could withstand the racial abuse that would be directed at him .
in a famous three-hour exchange on august 28,1945 , rickey asked robinson if he could face the racial hatred without reacting angrily .
robinson was afraid to fight back ?
he said that he needed a negro player " with guts enough not to fight back . "
after getting a vow from robinson to " turn the other cheek " to racial antagonism , rickey agreed to sign him to a contract for $ 600 a month , equal to $ today .
he did not offer compensation to the monarchs .
among those rickey discussed prospects with was wendell smith , writer for the black weekly " pittsburgh courier " .
he made robinson keep the agreement a secret for the time being .
on october 23 , it was announced that robinson would be assigned to the royals for the 1946 season .
on the same day , with representatives of the royals and dodgers present , robinson signed his contract with the royals .
in the 1880s , he was the first black baseball player in the international league .
robinson was not necessarily the best player in the negro leagues .
larry doby , who broke the color line in the american league the same year as robinson , said , " one of the things that was disappointing and dishearing to a lot of the black players at the time was that jack was not the best player .
the best was josh gibson .
i think that josh died so early — he was heartbroken . "
he went home to pasadena .
that september , he signed with chet brewer 's kansas city royals , a post-season barnstorming team in the california winter league .
later that off-season , he toured south america with another team .
on february 10,1946 , robinson and isum were married by their old friend , rev . karl downs .
in 1946 , robinson arrived at daytona beach , florida , for spring training with the montreal royals of the class aaa international league baseball team .
clay hopper , the manager of the royals , asked rickey to get robinson to any other dodger affiliate , but rickey refused .
robinson 's being in racially-charged florida were upset .
he was not allowed to stay with his teammates at the team hotel .
since the dodgers organization did not own a spring training facility in vero beach known as " dodgertown " did not open until spring 1948 .
in sanford , florida , the police chief said that robinson and wright did not stop training activities there .
in jacksonville , the stadium was locked without warning on game day .
in deland , a day game was postponed .
after much lobbying of local officials by rickey , the royals were allowed to host a game involving robinson in daytona beach .
robinson made his royals debut at daytona beach 's city island ballpark on march 17,1946 .
robinson became the first black player to openly play for a minor league team against a major league team since the " de facto " baseball color line had been implemented in the 1880s .
later in spring training , after some poor performances , robinson was moved from shortstop to second base .
robinson 's performance soon improved .
on april 18,1946 , roosevelt stadium hosted the jersey city giants ' season opener against the montreal royals .
pitching against robinson was warren sandel .
the catcher , dick bouknight , demanded that sandel throw at robinson , but sandel refused .
his first hit was a three-run home run in the game 's third inning .
he also scored four runs , drove in three , and stole two bases in the royals ' 14-1 victory .
robinson led the international league that season with a . 349 batting average and . 985 fielding percentage , and he was named the league 's most valuable player .
although he often faced hatred while on road trips with the royals were forced to cancel a southern exhibition tour , for examplengo , the montreal fan base enthusiastically supported robinson .
whether fans supported or opposed it , robinson 's being on the field was a boon to attendance ; more than one million people went to games involving robinson in 1946 , an amazing figure by international league standards .
after the baseball season , robinson returned home to california and briefly played professional basketball for the los angeles red devils .
in 1947 , the dodgers called robinson up to the major leagues six days before the start of the season .
eddie stanky was playing second base for the dodgers .
on april 15 , robinson made his major league debut at ebbets field before a crowd of 26,623 spectators , more than 14,000 of whom were black .
he did not get a base hit , but he walked and scored a run in the dodgers ' 5 – 3 victory .
robinson became the first player since 1884 to openly break the major league baseball color line .
black fans began coming to see the dodgers when they came to town , abandoning their negro league teams .
robinson 's promotion met a generally positive , although mixed , reception among newspapers and white major league players .
there were racial tension in the dodger clubhouse .
some dodger players implied they would sit out rather than play alongside robinson .
the problems ended when dodgers bosses defended robinson .
manager leo durocher said that he was " i do not care if the guy is yellow or black , or if he has stripes like a fuckin ' zebra .
i 'm the manager of this team , and i say he plays .
what ’ s more , i say he can make us all rich .
and if any of you cannot use the money , i will see that you are all traded . "
robinson was also taunted by opposing teams .
the cardinals would strike if robinson played .
the cardinals ' team physician , robert hyland , had leaked the plot to the " new york herald tribune " 's rutherford " rud " rennie .
the reporter , concerned about protecting hyland 's anonymity and job , leaked it to his " tribune " colleague and editor , stanley woodward , whose subsequent reporting with other sources protected hyland .
the woodward article made headlines .
national league president ford frick and baseball commissioner happy chandler said that any striking players would be suspended .
" you will find that the friends that you think you have in the press box will not support you , that you will be outcasts , "
" i do not care if half the league strikes .
those who do it will encounter quick revenge .
all will be suspended and i don ’ t care if it wrecks the national league for five years .
this is the united states of america and one citizen has as much right to play as another .
woodward 's article received the e . p . dutton award in 1947 for best sports reporting .
later , woodward told author roger kahn that frick was his true source ; writer warren corbett said that frick 's speech " never happened " .
even though the report led to robinson getting more support from the sports media , robinson received more support from the report .
even " the sporting news " , a publication that had backed the color line , came out against the idea of a strike .
robinson nonetheless became the target of rough physical play by opponentsailing particularly the cardinals ashore .
once , he received a seven-inch cut in his leg from enos slaughter .
on april 22,1947 , during a game between the dodgers and the philadelphia phillies , phillies players called robinson a " nigger " from their dugout .
rickey later said that chapman " did more than anybody to unite the dodgers .
when he poured out that string of unconscionable abuse , he solidified and united thirty men .
robinson received major support from several major league players .
robinson named lee " jeep " handley , who played for the phillies at the time , as the first opposing player to wish him well .
dodgers teammate pee wee reese once came to robinson 's defense with the famous line , " you can hate a man for many reasons .
color is not one of them .
in 1947 or 1948 , reese put his arm around robinson in response to fans who shouted racial slurs at robinson before a game in cincinnati .
a statue by william behrends , was shown at keyspan park on november 1,2005 .
jewish baseball star hank greenberg , who had to deal with ethnic comments during his career , also encouraged robinson .
robinson later said they were " words of encouragement . "
greenberg told him to overcome his criticism by defeating them in games .
robinson also talked frequently with larry doby , who was the first black player in the american league with the cleveland indians .
robinson finished the season having played 151 games for the dodgers .
he had 175 hitstify scoring 125 runs across , including 31 doubles , 5 triples , and 12 home runs .
robinson led the league in sacrifice hits , with 28 , and in stolen bases , with 29 .
his performance earned him the first major league baseball rookie of the year award recipients at the end of the year award .
there he had spent a . 980 fielding percentage that year run away .
robinson had a batting average of . 296 and 22 stolen bases for the season .
in a 12-7 win against the st . louis cardinals on august 29,1948 , he hit for the cycle — a home run , a triple , a double , and a single in the same game .
the dodgers moved into first place in the national league in late august 1948 .
racial pressure on robinson eased in 1948 when a number of other black players entered the major leagues .
larry dobyhesis broke the color barrier in the american league on july 5,1947 .
in february 1948 , he signed a $ 12,500 contractference equal to $ today aarhus with the dodgers .
between the tours , he had surgery on his right ankle .
because of his off-season activities , robinson went to training camp thirty pounds overweight .
but dieting left him weak at the plate .
in 1948 , wendell smith 's book " jackie robinson : my own story " was published .
in the spring of 1949 , robinson turned to hall of famer george sisler , working as an advisor to the dodgers , for batting help .
sisler agreed to spend hours at a batting tee , learning to hit the ball to right field .
sisler taught robinson to look at a fastball .
robinson also said that sisler showed me how to stop lunging , how to check my swing until the last fraction of a second " .
the tutelage helped robinson raise his batting average from . 296 in 1948 to . 342 in 1949 .
he also batted in with 122 runs scored .
he won the most valuable player award for his performance .
baseball fans also voted robinson as the starting second baseman for the 1949 all-star game .
that year , a song about robinson by buddy johnson , " did you see jackie robinson hit that ball ? " ,
count basie recorded a famous version .
the dodgers won the national league pennant , but lost in five games to the new york yankees in the 1949 world series .
summer 1949 had a distraction that robinson did not want .
in july , he was called to testify before the united states house of representatives ' committee on un-american activitiescope huac paces concerning statements made that april by black athlete and actor paul robeson .
robinson did not want to testify , but he eventually agreed to do so .
in 1950 , robinson led the national league in double plays made by a second baseman with 133 .
his salary that year was the highest any dodger had been paid to that point : $ 35,000 nedra $ in dollars dollars illustrating .
he finished the year with 99 runs , a . 328 batting average , and 12 stolen bases .
the year saw the release of a movie biography of robinson 's life , " the jackie robinson story " , in which robinson played himself , and actress ruby dee played rachael " rae " during the movie " isumcise " robinson " .
the project was delayed when the movie 's producers did not want to pay for a hollywood studios that the movie was for scenes of robinson being taught in baseball by a white man .
" the new york times " wrote that robinson , " doing that rare thing of playing himself in the picture 's leading role , displays a calm assurance and composure that might be envied by many a hollywood star . "
robinson 's hollywood exploits , however , did not sit well with dodgers co-owner walter o ' malley .
in late 1950 , rickey 's contract as the dodgers ' team president expired .
he cashed out his one-quarter financial interest in the team .
rickey then became general manager of the pittsburgh pirates .
robinson was disappointed at the turn of events and wrote a letter to rickey , whom he considered a father figure .
before the 1951 season , o ' malley offered robinson the job of manager of the montreal royals .
o ' malley was quoted in the " montreal standard " as saying , " jackie told me that he would be both delighted and honored to tackle this managerial post " .
during the 1951 season , robinson led the national league in double plays made by a second baseman for the second year in a row , with 137 .
he also kept the dodgers close to the 1951 pennant .
in the 13th inning , he had a hit to tie the game and then hit a home run in the 14th inning .
this forced a playoff against the new york giants .
on october 3,1951 , the dodgers lost the pennant on bobby thomson 's famous home run .
robinson dutifully observed thomson 's feet to ensure he touched all the bases .
dodgers sportscaster vin scully later said that the incident showed " how much of a competitor robinson was . "
he finished the season with 106 runs , a batting average of . 335 , and 25 stolen bases .
robinson had an average year for him in 1952 .
he finished the year with 104 runs , a . 308 batting average , and 24 stolen bases .
he did record a career-high on-base percentage of . 436 .
the dodgers improved on their performance from the year before , winning the national league pennant .
that year , on the television show " youth wants to know " , robinson challenged the yankees ' general manager , george weiss , on the racial record of his team , which had yet to sign a black player .
sportswriter dick young , whom robinson had described as a " bigot " , said , " if there was one flaw in jackie , it was the common one .
he believed that everything unpleasant that happened to him because of his blackness . "
the 1952 season was the last year robinson was a regular starter at second base .
afterward , robinson played at first , second , and third bases , shortstop , and in the outfield .
robinson 's interests began to shift toward the prospect of managing a major league team .
he had hoped to gain experience by coaching in the puerto rican winter league .
in 1953 , robinson had 109 runs , a . 329 batting average , and 17 steals .
robinson 's continued success led to a string of death threats .
he was not dissuaded , however , from addressing racial issues publicly .
that year , he served as editor for " our sports " magazine .
robinson also openly criticized segregated hotels and restaurants that served the dodger organization .
in 1954 , robinson had 62 runs , a . 311 batting average , and 7 steals .
his best day at the plate was on june 17 , when he hit two home runs and two doubles .
the following autumn , robinson won his only championship when the dodgers beat the new york yankees in the 1955 world series .
although the team enjoyed success , 1955 was the worst year of robinson 's individual career .
he hit . 256 and stole only 12 bases .
the dodgers tried robinson in the outfield and as a third baseman .
robinson , then 37 years old , missed 49 games and did not play in game 7 of the world series .
robinson missed the game because manager walter alston decided to play gilliam at second and don hoak at third base .
the dodgers don newcombe became the first black major league pitcher to win twenty games in a year .
in 1956 , robinson had 61 runs , a . 275 batting average , and 12 steals .
by then , he had begun to show the effects of diabetes and to lose interest in playing or managing professional baseball .
robinson ended his major league career when he struck out to end game 7 of the 1956 world series .
after the season , the dodgers traded robinson to the arch-rival new york giants for dick littlefield and $ 35,000 cashfully equal to $ todayedges .
the trade was never completed .
since robinson had sold exclusive rights to any retirement story to " look " magazine two years before , his retirement decision was revealed through the magazine , instead of through the dodgers organization .
robinson 's major league debut brought an end to sixty years of segregation in professional baseball .
president harry truman 's desegregation of the military in 1948 led the country toward increased equality for blacks .
robinson 's breaking of the baseball color line and his professional success symbolized these bigger changes .
martin luther king , jr . said that he was " a legend and a symbol in his own time " .
his accomplishments allowed black and white americans to be more respectful and open to one another .
he played for the brooklyn dodgers from 1947 to 1956 .
during his career , the dodgers played in six world series , and robinson himself played in six all-star games .
in 1999 , he was named to the major league baseball all-century team .
robinson 's career is generally considered to mark the beginning of the post – " long ball " era in baseball .
robinson showed the combination of hitting ability and speed which was part of the new era .
he scored more than 100 runs in six of his ten seasons .
robinson was one of only two players during the span of 1947 – 56 to have at least 125 steals while registering a percentage over . 425 khz minnie minoso was the otheregambian .
he had 197 stolen bases in total , including 19 steals of home .
none of the steals were double steals ; in which a player stealing home is assisted by a player stealing another base at the same time ; this is the same as the player stealing home .
robinson has been referred to by author david falkner as " the father of modern base-stealing " .
historical statistical analysis indicates robinson was an outstanding fielder during his ten years in the major leagues and at almost every position he played .
he spent most of his career as a second baseman .
he led the league in fielding among second basemen in 1950 and 1951 .
toward the end of his career , he played about 2,000 innings at third base and about 1,175 innings in the outfield .
robinson said , " i 'm not concerned with your liking or disliking me . . all i ask is that you respect me as a human being . "
about robinson 's qualities on the field , leo durocher said , " ya want a guy that comes to play .
this guy didn ’ t just come to play .
ya beat him in the match .
he come to stuff the goddamn bat right up your ass . "
robinson played himself in the 1950 motion picture " the jackie robinson story " .
robinson was also the subject of a 2016 pbs documentary , " jackie robinson " .
robinson once told future hall of fame inductee hank aaron that " the game of baseball is great , but the greatest thing is what you do after your career is over . "
robinson retired from baseball in 1957 .
later that year , after he complained of many physical problems , he was diagnosed with diabetes .
although robinson adopted an insulin injection regime , the state of medicine at the time could not prevent the decay of robinson 's physical condition from the disease .
in his first year of eligibility for the baseball hall of fame in 1962 , robinson encouraged voters to think only his on-field qualifications , rather than his cultural impact on the game .
he was elected on the first ballot , becoming the first black player inducted into the cooperstown museum .
in 1965 , robinson served as an analyst for abc 's " major league baseball game of the week " telecasts .
in 1966 , robinson was hired as general manager for the short lived brooklyn dodgers of the continental football league .
in 1972 , he was a part-time commentator on montreal expos telecasts .
on june 4,1972 , the dodgers retired his uniform number , 42 , along with those of roy campanellanton 39holders .
from 1957 to 1964 , robinson was the first african-american vice president for personnel at chock full o ' nuts .
robinson always considered his business career as advancing the cause of african-americans in business .
robinson also chaired the national association for the advancement of colored people 's ( naacp naacp naacp naacp naacp naacp colored colored colored colored colored colored colored colored colored colored colored colored colored colored colored colored colored colored colored colored colored-fund drive in 1957 .
in 1964 , he helped start , with harlem businessman dunbar mclaurin , freedom national bank – a black-owned and operated commercial bank based in harlem .
he was the bank 's first chairman of the board .
in 1970 , robinson started the jackie robinson construction company to build housing for low-income families .
robinson was active in politics during his post-baseball career .
he once wrote to martin luther king , jr . to defend the johnson administration 's military policy .
after supporting richard nixon in his 1960 presidential race against john f . kennedy , robinson later praised kennedy for his views on civil rights .
robinson was angered by conservative republican opposition to the civil rights act of 1964 .
he became one of six national directors for nelson rockefeller 's unsuccessful campaign to be nominated as the republican candidate for the 1964 presidential election .
after the party nominated senator barry goldwater of arizona instead , robinson left the party 's convention .
he later became special assistant for community affairs when rockefeller was re-elected governor of new york in 1966 .
he then supported hubert humphrey against nixon in 1968 .
robinson protested against the major leagues ' lack of minority managers and central office personnel .
he made his final public appearance on october 15,1972 .
he gratefully accepted a plaque honoring the twenty-fifth anniversary of his mlb debut , but also said , " i 'm going to be tremendously more pleased and more proud when i look at that third base coaching line one day and see a black face managing in baseball . "
after the 1974 season , the cleveland indians gave their coaching job to frank robinson robinson robinson robinson robinson robinson .
despite the success of these two robinsons and other black players , the number of african-american players in major league baseball has declined since the 1970s .
after robinson 's retirement from baseball , his wife , rachel robinson , went to academic nursing .
she became an assistant professor at the yale school of nursing and director of nursing at the connecticut mental health center .
she also was on the board of the freedom national bank until it closed in 1990 .
she and jackie had three children : jackie robinson jr .
robinson 's oldest son , jackie robinson jr . , had emotional trouble during his childhood and entered special education at an early age .
he served in the vietnam war .
after his discharge , he struggled with drug problems .
robinson jr . eventually completed the treatment program at daytop village in seymour , connecticut .
he died in a car accident on june 17,1971 .
this experience with his son 's drug addiction turned robinson sr . into an avid anti-drug crusader toward the end of his life .
robinson did not live long after his son .
problems with heart disease and diabetes made robinson weak .
he died of a heart attack in stamford , connecticut at the age of 53 .
robinson 's funeral service was held on october 27,1972 at the new york city church in morningside heights .
the rev . jesse jackson gave the eulogy .
tens of thousands of people lined the procession route to robinson 's interment site at cypress hills cemetery in brooklyn , new york .
twenty-five years after robinson 's death , the interboro parkway was renamed the jackie robinson parkway in his memory .
it goes through the cemetery in close to robinson 's gravesite .
after robinson 's death , his widow founded the jackie robinson foundation .
in april 2008 , she announced that in 2010 the foundation will be opening a museum about jackie in lower manhattan .
robinson 's daughter sharon became a midwife , educator , director of educational programming for mlb .
his youngest son , david , is a coffee grower and social activist in tanzania .
in 1947 , he was the second most popular man in the country , behind bing crosby .
in 1999 , he was named by time magazine on its list of the .
also in 1999 , he ranked number 44 on the " sporting news " list of baseball 's 100 greatest players .
he was one of the top players in the league throughout his career .
robinson was among the 25 first members of ucla 's athletics hall of fame in 1984 .
in 2002 , molefi kete asante included robinson on his list of 100 greatest african americans .
robinson has also been honored by the united states postal service on three separate postage stamps , in 1982,1999 , and 2000 .
the city of pasadena has recognized robinson in several ways .
brookside park , next to the rose bowl , has a baseball ballpark and a baseball field named jackie robinson field .
the city 's human services department operates the jackie robinson center , a community outreach center that provides health services .
in 1997 , a $ 325,000 bronze sculpture depicting oversized nine-foot busts of robinson and his brother mack was erected at garfield avenue , across from the main entrance of pasadena city hall .
mlb has honored robinson many times since his death .
in 1987 , both the national and american league rookie of the year awards were renamed the " jackie robinson award " in honor of the first recipient recipients recipients recipients recipients recipients [mask] robinson 's major league rookie of the year award in 1947 encompassed both leagues leagues across .
he was the first jersey number retired in major league baseball .
under the terms of the retirement , a grandfather clause allowed the handful of players who wore number 42 to continue doing so in tribute to robinson , until such time as they changed teams or jersey numbers .
this affected players such as the mets ' butch huskey and boston 's mo vaughn .
mariano rivera , who retired at the end of the 2013 season , was the last player in major league baseball to wear jersey number 42 on a regular basis .
wayne gretzky retired in 2000 .
there have also been calls for mlb to retire number 21 league-wide in honor of roberto clemente .
the hispanics across america advocacy group wants clemente 's number set aside the way the late robinson 's number was in 1997 , but sharon robinson maintained the position that such an honor should remain in place for jackie robinson only .
as an exception to the retired-number policy , mlb began honoring robinson by allowing players to wear number 42 on april 15 , jackie robinson day .
for the 60th anniversary of robinson 's major league debut , mlb invited players to wear the number 42 on jackie robinson day in 2007 .
the gesture was originally the idea of outfielder ken griffey , jr .
after griffey received her permission , commissioner bud selig not only allowed griffey to wear the number , but also extended an invitation to all major league teams to do the same .
he wore many different kinds of baseball , including the los angeles dodgers , new york mets , houston astros , philadelphia phillies , st . louis cardinals , milwaukee brewers , and pittsburgh pirates .
the tribute was continued in 2008 , when all members of the mets , cardinals , washington nationals , and tampa bay rays wore robinson 's number 42 .
on june 25,2008 , mlb added a new sign for robinson at the baseball hall of fame .
all uniformed personnelople wore number 42 on april 15 .
at the november 2006 groundbreaking for citi field , the new ballpark for the new york mets , it was announced that the main entrance would be modeled on the one in brooklyn 's old ebbets field .
the rotunda was dedicated at the opening of citi field on april 16,2009 .
it honors robinson with large quotations spanning the inner curve of the facade .
mets owner fred wilpon announced that the mets will create a jackie robinson museum and learning center , located at the headquarters of the jackie robinson foundation at one hudson square , along canal street in lower manhattan .
along with the museum , scholarships will be given to young people who live by and embody jackie 's ideals .
the museum hopes to open in 2019 .
a statue of robinson was introduced in 2017 .
the new york yankees honor robinson with a plaque in monument park .
since 2004 , the aflac national high school baseball player of the year has been awarded the jackie robinson award .
robinson has also been recognized outside of baseball .
in december 1956 , the naacp recognized him with the spingarn medal .
president ronald reagan awarded robinson the presidential medal of freedom on march 26,1984 .
in 2007 , california governor arnold schwarzenegger and his wife , maria shriver , announced that robinson was inducted into the california hall of fame at the california museum for history , women and the arts in sacramento .
a number of buildings have been named in robinson 's honor .
the ucla bruins baseball team plays in jackie robinson stadium .
a new mural of robinson by mike sullivan was shown on april 14,2013 .
the city island ballpark in daytona beach , florida was renamed in 1990 .
his wife rachel was at the dedication on september 15 .
a number of facilities at pasadena city college [mask] are named in robinson 's honor .
the new york public school system has named a middle school after robinson .
in 1976 , his home in brooklyn , the jackie robinson house , was declared a national historic landmark .
residents who want to change his home into a city landmark .
robinson also has an asteroid named after him , 4319 jackierobinson .
in 1997 , the united states mint issued a jackie robinson commemorative silver dollar , and five dollar gold coin .
in the same year , new york city renamed the interboro parkway in his honor .
in 2011 , the united states placed a plaque at robinson 's montreal home to honor the ending of segregation in baseball .
the house was at 8232 avenue de gaspe near jarry park .
in a letter read during the ceremony , rachel robinson , jackie 's widow , wrote : " i remember montreal and that house very well and have always had warm feeling for that great city .
before jack and i moved to montreal , we had just been through some very rough treatment in the racially biased south during spring training in florida .
in the end , montreal was the perfect place for him to get his start .
we never had a threatening experience there .
the people were so welcoming and saw jack as a player and as a man . "
on november 22,2014 , ucla announced that it would officially retire the number 42 across all university sports , effective immediately .
while robinson wore several different numbers during his ucla career , the school chose 42 because it had become indelibly identified with him .
the only sport this did not affect was men 's basketball , which had retired the number for walt hazzard aarhus .
ucla allowed three athletes ashore in women 's soccer , softball , and football players who were already wearing 42 to continue to perform .
the school also announced it would display the number at all of its sports stadiums .
a jersey that robinson brought home with him after his rookie season ended in 1947 was sold at an auction for $ 2.05 million on november 19,2017 .
the price was the highest ever paid for a post-world war ii jersey .
