colossus was a set of computers developed by british codebreakers in the years 1943 – 1945 to help in the cryptanalysis of the lorenz cipher .
colossus used thermionic valves valves valvestify to perform boolean and counting operations .
colossus is the world 's first programmable electronic , digital computer .
colossus was designed by research telephone engineer tommy flowers to solve a problem posed by mathematician max newman at the government code and cypher school seized gc & cs cs cs cs cslington at bletchley park .
alan turing used probability in cryptanalysis .
it has sometimes been wrongly said that turing designed colossus to help the cryptanalysis of the enigma .
turing 's machine that helped decode enigma was the electromechanical bombe , not colossus .
the first colossus worked at the colossus mark 1 in december 1943 .
a mark 2 colossus first worked on 1 june 1944 .
ten colossus computers were in use at the end of the war .
bletchley park used these machines to get a vast amount of high-level military intelligence from intercepted radiotelegraphy messages between the german high command uss " okw " .
the existence of the colossus machines was kept secret until the mid-1970s ; the machines and the plans for building them had been destroyed in the 1960s as part of the effort to maintain the secrecy of the project .
this deprived most of those involved with colossus of the credit for pioneering electronic digital computing during their lifetimes .
a new copy of a mark 2 colossus was completed in 2008 by tony sale and some volunteers .
the colossus computers were used to help decipher intercepted radio teleprinter messages that had been encrypted using an unknown device .
intelligence information revealed that the germans called the wireless teleprinter transmission systems " " sagefisch " 『 sawfish spp .
the british called the machine and its coded messages " tunny " issn tunafishfishfishfish " .
before the germans increased the security of their operating procedures , british cryptanalysts found how the unseen machine functioned and built an imitation of it called " british tunny " .
it was deduced that the machine had twelve wheels .
it combined the plaintext characters with a stream of key characters using the xor boolean function to produce the ciphertext .
in august 1941 , a blunder by german operators led to the transmission of two versions of the same message with identical machine settings .
these were intercepted and worked on at bletchley park .
first , john tiltman , a very talented gc & cs cryptanalyst , came up with a key stream of almost 4000 characters .
then , a newly-arrived member of the research section , used this key stream to work out the logical structure of the lorenz machine .
he named the χ χ χ χ χ χ ψcope " chi " fiba -lrb- ψ ψ lehigh lehighシometer -rrb- and ψ ψ yucatan " psi " fiba wheels , the remaining two he called μ μ μaurus " mutama " or " motor " wheels .
the " chi " wheels stepped regularly with each letter that was encrypted , while the " psi " wheels stepped irregularly , under the control of the motor wheels .
with a sufficiently random key stream , a vernam cipher removes the natural language property of a plaintext message of having an uneven frequency distribution of the different characters , to produce a uniform distribution in the ciphertext .
the tunny machine did this well .
the cryptanalysts looked out by examining the frequency distribution of the character-to-character changes in the ciphertext , instead of the plain characters , there was a departure from uniformity which provided a way into the system .
this was achieved by " differencing " in which each bit or character was xor-ed with its successor .
after germany surrendered , allied forces captured a tunny machine .
in order to decrypt the transmitted messages , two tasks had to be performed .
the first was " wheel breaking " .
these patterns were set up on the lorenz machine and then used for a fixed period of time for a succession of different messages .
each transmission was enciphered with a different start position of the wheels .
turing was the inventor of the turing system .
turing 's technique was further developed into " rectangling " , for which colossus could produce tables for manual analysis .
colossus 2,4 , 6,7 and 9 had a " gadget " to help this process .
the second task was " wheel setting " .
it was this task for which colossus was first designed .
to find the start position of the " chi " wheels for a message , colossus compared two character streams , counting statistics from the evaluation of programmable boolean functions .
the two streams were the ciphertext , which was read at high speed from a paper tape , and the key stream , which was generated internally , in a simulation of the unknown german machine .
they were checked by examining the frequency distribution of the characters in processed ciphertext .
colossus produced these frequency counts .
by using different measures and knowing that the " psi " wheels did not advance with each character , tutte worked out that trying just two differenced bits ciphertext would produce a statistic that was non-random .
tutte 's " 1 + 2 break in " became the first break in the series .
it involved calculating the following boolean function : and counting the number of times it yielded " false " coulter zero gibbons " .
if this number exceeded a set value , it was printed out .
the cryptanalyst would examine the printout to determine which of the putative start positions was likely to be the correct one for the chi-1 and chi-2 wheels .
this technique would then be applied to other pairs of , or single , impulses to determine the likely start position of all five " chi " wheels .
from this , the de-" chi "nity dvity of a ciphertext could be obtained .
if the frequency distribution of characters in the de-" chi " version of the ciphertext was within certain limits , " wheel setting " of the " chi " wheels was considered to have been achieved , and the message settings and de-chi were passed to the " testery " .
this was the section at bletchley park led by major ralph tester .
colossus could also get the start of the " psi " and motor wheels , but this was not much done until the last few months of the war , when there were plenty of colossi available and the number of tunny messages had declined .
colossus was a part of the " newmanry " , the section headed by the mathematician max newman that was responsible for machine methods against the twelve-rotor lorenz sz40 / 42 on-line teleprinter cipher machinechrome code named tunny , for tunafishfishfishfishfishfishfishcence .
the first machine was called " heath robinson " .
it proved the concept of machine analysis for this part of the process , but it was unreliable .
the electro-mechanical parts were slow and it was difficult to synchronise two looped paper tapes , one containing the enciphered message , and the other representing part of the key stream of the lorenz machine , also the tapes tended to stretch when being read at up to 2000 characters per second .
tommy flowers was a senior electrical engineer and head of the switching group at the post office research station at dollis hill .
he had been involved with gc & cs at bletchley park in february 1941 .
he was recommended to max newman by alan turing , who had been impressed by his work on the bombes .
the main parts of the heath robinson machine were as follows .
flowers had been brought in to design the heath robinson 's combining unit .
he was not impressed by the system of a key tape that had to be kept synchronised with the message tape .
he gave this design to max newman in february 1943 .
flowers , however , knew from his pre-war work that most thermionic valve failures occurred as a result of the thermal stresses at power up , so not powering a machine down reduced failure rates to very low levels .
additionally , the heaters were started at a low voltage then slowly brought up to full voltage to reduce the thermal stress .
the valves were soldered in to avoid problems with plug-in bases .
flowers persisted with the idea and got support from the director of the research station , w gordon radley .
flowers and his team spent eleven months from early february 1943 designing and building a machine that dispensed with the second tape of the heath robinson , by generating the wheel patterns electronically .
flowers used some of his own money for the project .
the prototype was mark 1 colossus .
it was taken to bletchley park , where it was delivered on 18 january and re-assembled by harry fensom and don horwood .
it was operational in january and it successfully attacked its first message on 5 february 1944 .
it was a large structure .
however , a memo held in the national archives written by max newman on 18 january 1944 records that ' colossus arrives today . "
during the development of the prototype , an improved design had been developed – the mark 2 colossus .
four of these were ordered in march 1944 and by the end of april the number on order had been increased to twelve .
dollis hill was told to have the first of these working by june 1 .
allen coombs took over the production mark 2 colossi , the first of which-containing 2400 valves became operational at 08 : 00 on 1 june 1944 , just in time for the invasion of normandy on d-day .
later , colossus were delivered at the rate of about one a month .
by the time of v-e day there were ten colossus computers working at bletchley park .
the mark 2 's main units were as follows .
most of the design of the electronics was the work of tommy flowers , assisted by william chandler , sidney broadhurst and allen coombs .
coombs remembered flowers , having produced a rough draft of his design , tearing it into pieces that he handed out to his colleagues for them to do the detailed design and get their team to manufacture it .
the mark 2 colossus colossus had five times faster and was simpler to use .
data was by photoelectric reading of a paper tape transcription of the enciphered message .
this was arranged in a continuous loop so that it could be read and re-read multiple times – there being no internal store for the data .
the design overcame the problem of synchronizing the electronic with the speed of the message tape , by making a signal from reading its sprocket holes .
the speed of operation was limited by the mechanics of reading the tape .
during development the tape reader was tested up to 9700 characters per secondacion 53 mph before the tape broke up .
so 5000 characters / second estimated 40 ft / s turnout was the speed for regular use .
flowers designed a 6-character shift register .
this five-way parallelism allows five simultaneous tests and counts to be performed giving an effective processing speed of 25,000 characters per second .
the computation used a tunny message .
the newmanry was staffed by cryptanalysts , operators from the women 's royal naval service cremated wrnshesis -lrb- known as " wrens " – and engineers who were permanently on hand for maintenance and repair -rrb- .
by the end of the war the staffing was 272 wrens and 27 men .
the first job in operating colossus for a new message was to prepare the paper loop .
this was done by the wrens who put the two ends together using bostik glue .
this hole is between the fourth and fifth channels 1 ⁄ sprocket holes from the end of the message .
these were read by specially positioned photocells and indicated when the message was about to start and when it ended .
the operator would then thread the paper tape through the gate and around the pulleys of the bedstead and adjust the tension .
one tape could be loaded while the previous one was being run .
a switch on the selection panel specified the " near " or the " far " tape .
after completing resetting and zeroizing tasks , the wren operators would operate the " set total " decade switches and the k2 panel switches to set the desired algorithm .
when the tape was up to speed , the tape was up to operate the master start switch .
howard campaigne , a mathematician and cryptanalyst from the us navy 's op-20-g , wrote the following in a foreword to flowers ' 1983 paper " the design of colossus " .
colossus was not a stored-program computer .
the input data was read from the looped message paper tape and the electronic pattern generators for the " chi " , " psi " and motor wheels .
the programs for the processors were set and held on the switches and jack panel connections .
each processor could evaluate a boolean function and display the number of times it yielded the specified value of " false "pool .
input to the processors came from two sources , the shift registers from tape reading and the thyratron rings that emulated the wheels of the tunny machine .
the characters on the paper tape were called z and the characters from the tunny emulator were referred to by the greek letters that bill tutte had given them when working out the logical structure of the machine .
on the selection panel , switches have either z or δz , either formula _ 1 or δformula _ 1 and either formula _ 5 or δformula _ 5 for the data to be passed to the jack field and ' k2 switch panel ' .
these signals from the wheel simulators could be specified as stepping on with each new pass of the message tape or not .
the k2 switch panel had a group of switches on the left hand side to specify the algorithm .
the switches on the right hand side chose the counter to which the result was fed .
the plugboard allowed less specialized conditions to be imposed .
the k2 switch panel switches and plugboard allowed about five billion different combinations of the selected variables .
as an example : a set of runs for a message tape might initially involve two " chi " wheels , as in tutte 's 1 + 2 algorithm .
such a two-wheel run was called a long run .
the subsequent runs might only involve running one " chi " wheel , giving a short run taking about two minutes .
after the first long run , the choice of next algorithm to be tried was given by the cryptanalyst .
however , decision trees for this iterative process could be produced for use by the wren operators in proportion of cases .
colossus was the first of the electronic digital machines with programmability .
a colossus computer was not a turing-complete computer .
the university of san francisco professor benjamin wells has shown that if all of the ten colossus machines made were rearranged in a cluster , then the entire set of computers could have simulated a universal turing machine , and thus be turing complete .
the idea of a computer as a general purpose machine was not very important until after world war ii .
the colossus was highly secret for 30 years after the war .
consequently , it was not included in the history of computing hardware for many years , and flowers and his associates were deprived of the recognition they were due .
colossus 1-10 were taken apart after the war .
some parts , sanitised as to their original purpose , were taken to max newman 's royal society computing machine laboratory at manchester university .
tommy flowers was ordered to destroy all documentation and burnt them in a furnace at dollis hill .
a small number of people who knew that large-scale , reliable , high-speed electronic digital computing devices were possible .
it was edvac that was the seminal computer architecture of the time .
in 1972 herman goldstine , who was unaware of colossus and its legacy to the projects of people such as alan turing dq acetyle , max newmanheimer manchester computers percival and harry huskey ttygram , wrote that , , , , was not a part of colossus .
randell 's efforts started to bear fruit in the mid-1970s .
a team led by tony sale built a colossus mark 2 .
in spite of the blueprints and hardware being destroyed , a surprising amount of material survived , mainly in engineers ' notebooks , but a considerable amount of it in the u . s .
the optical tape reader might have been the biggest problem , but dr . arnold lynch , its designer , was able to redesign it to his own original design .
the reconstruction is on display , in the historically correct place for colossus no . 9 , at the national museum of computing , in h block bletchley park in milton keynes , buckinghamshire .
in november 2007 , to celebrate the project completion and mark the start of fundraising for the national museum of computing , a cipher competition pitted the rebuilt colossus against radio amateurs worldwide .
the competition was easily won by radio amateur joachim schuth .
the colossus team was hampered by their wish to use world war ii radios .
nevertheless , the winner 's 1.4 ghz laptop , running his own program , took less than a minute to find the settings for all 12 wheels .
the german codebreaker said : " my laptop destroyed ciphertext at a speed of 1.2 million letters per second — 240 times faster than colossus .
if you scale the cpu frequency by that factor , you get an equivalent clock of 5.8 mhz for colossus .
that is a remarkable speed for a computer built in 1944 . "
the cipher challenge verified the successful completion of the rebuild project .
" on the strength of today 's performance colossus is as good as it was six decades ago " , commented tony sale .
" we are delighted to have produced a fitting tribute to the people who worked at bletchley park .
there was a fictional computer named " colossus " in the 1970 movie " colossus " .
this was coincidence as it dates the public release of information about colossus , or even its name .
neal stephenson 's novel " cryptonomicon " skulls .
