the kilogramlogramlogramlogramlogramlogramlogramlogramlogramlogramlogram is the base unit of mass in the international system of unitshesis silogram , having the symbol kg .
in 1799 , the " kilogramme des archives " , a platinum artefact , replaced it as the standard of mass .
in 1879 a cylinder of platinum-iridium , the international prototype of the kilogramlogramlogramlogramlogramlogramlogramlogramlogramlogramlogram became the standard of the unit of mass for the metric system , and remained so until may 20,2019 , making the last of the metric base units to be defined by a physical artefact .
the ipk had diverged from its replicas by approximately 50 micrograms since their manufacture late in the 19th century .
as a result of this redefinition , the kilogram is now defined in terms of the second and the metre , replacing the ipk as primary standard .
the kilogram is defined in terms of three physical constants : the speed of light c , a specific atomic transition frequency δ ν , and the planck constant h .
the mass of the kilogram is exactly the same as the mass of a litre of water .
the gram , 1 / 1000 of a kilogram , was provisionally defined in 1795 as the mass of one cubic centimetre of water at the melting point of ice .
the kilogramme des archives was made as a prototype in 1799 .
the international prototype kilogram was commissioned by the general conference on weights and measures measures measures measures measures measures measuring up to the size of the metre convention .
copies of the ipk kept by national metrology laboratories around the world were compared with the ipk in 1889,1948 , and 1989 to provide traceability of measurements of mass anywhere in the world back to the ipk .
the kilogram was the last si unit that was directly defined by an artefact rather than fundamental physical properties that could be independently reproduced in different laboratories .
the international committee for weights and measures measures measures measureshend cipmmonium recommended in 2005 that the kilogram be redefined in terms of a fundamental constant of nature .
at its 2011 meeting , the cgpm agreed in principle that the kilogram should be redefined in terms of the planck constant , " h " .
the word was written into french law in 1795 , in the " decree of 18 germinal " , which revised the provisional system of units introduced by the french national convention two years earlier , where the had been defined as weight of a cubic centimetre of water , equal to 1 / 1000 of a .
the spelling was first used in english in 1795 .
in the united kingdom , the word " kilogram " is used .
in the 19th century the french word was imported into english .
the canadian government 's termium plus system says that " siislaus international system of unitsifolia usage " does not allow its usage .
when the united states congress gave the metric system legal status in 1866 , it permitted the use of the word " kilo " as an alternative to the word " kilogram " , but in 1990 revoked the status of the word " kilo " .
during the 19th century , the metric system was the centimeter-gram-second system of units .
in 1901 , after the discovery by james clerk maxwell , the three fundamental units of length , mass and time , giovanni giorgi proposed a new standard system that would include a fourth fundamental unit to measure quantities in electromagnetism .
in 1948 the cgpm commissioned the cipm to make recommendations for a single practical system of measurement , suitable for adoption by all countries .
the cgs and mks systems co-existed during much of the early-to-mid 20th century .
mass is related to the tendency of an object at rest to remain at rest , or if in motion to remain in motion at a constant velocity , unless acted upon by a force .
the weight of matter depends on gravity .
however , astronaut must exert ten times as much force to accelerate a 10-kilogram object at the same rate as a 1 kilogram object .
the weight of an object is measured by comparing the weight of a standard mass .
the international committee for weights and measures measures measures measures measures measures measures measures measures measures measures measures measures measures measures £ 1.8 km2 -lrb- 0.7 in -rrb- defines the kilogram by defining the planck constant in terms of the second and the metre .
before the redefinition , the kilogram and several other si units based on the kilogram were defined by a man-made metal artefact : the " kilogramme des archives " from 1799 to 1889 , and the international prototype kilogram from 1889 onwards .
in 1960 , the metre was defined with reference to a single platinum-iridium bar with two marks on it .
at the 94th meeting of the international committee for weights and measures measures measures measures measures measures measures measures measures measures measures measures measures measures measures measures measures measures measures measures measures cipmference in 2005 , it was recommended that the same be done with the kilogram .
in october 2010 , the cipm voted to submit a resolution for consideration at the general conference on weights and measures measures £ 0 .
the committee agreed that significant progress had been made , but decided that the data did not yet appear sufficiently robust to adopt the revised definition , and that work should continue to enable the adoption at the 26th meeting , scheduled for 2018 .
such a definition would theoretically permit any apparatus that could delineating the kilogram in terms of the planck constant to be used as long as it possessed enough precision , accuracy and stability .
all approaches would have precisely fixed one or more constants of nature at a defined value .
si prefixes are used with the unit " gram " , not " kilogram " .
