dengue fever is a mosquito-borne tropical disease caused by the dengue virus .
symptoms usually begin three to fourteen days after the person got infected .
this may include a high fever , headache , vomiting , muscle and joint pains , and a skin rash .
it takes two to seven days to recover .
if the dengue is bleeding , it can result in bleeding , low levels of blood platelets and plasma leakage , or into dengue shock syndrome .
dengue is spread by several mosquitoes of the " aedes " type , principally " a . aegypti " .
the virus has several types ; infection with one type usually gives lifelong immunity to that type , but only short-term immunity to the others .
infection with a different type increases the risk of getting worse .
tests are available to confirm the diagnosis .
a vaccine for dengue fever has been approved and is commercially available in a number of countries .
the vaccine is only recommended in people who have been infected .
other methods of prevention include reducing mosquito habitat and limiting exposure to bites .
this can be done by getting rid of standing water and wearing clothing that covers much of the body .
treatment of acute dengue is supportive .
for more severe cases , blood transfusion may be needed .
about half a million people need hospital admission every year .
paracetamolicative medicine is recommended instead of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs ingredient nsaidsotting for fever reduction and pain relief in dengue due to an increase risk of bleeding from nsaid use .
dengue is common in more than 110 countries .
every year between 50 million and 100 million people are infected and about 10,000 to 20,000 die .
the earliest descriptions of an outbreak date from 1779 .
the disease spread to other countries in the early 20th century .
apart from eliminating the mosquitos , work is still ongoing for medication targeted directly at the virus .
it is a neglected tropical disease .
people who get dengue virus are usually asymptomaticzong 80 % titus or have only mild symptoms such as an uncomplicated fever .
others have more severe illness ; 5 % nigering ; and in a small proportion it is life-threatening .
most often it is 4 to 7 days .
travelers returning from endemic areas are unlikely to have dengue if fever or other symptoms start more than 14 days after getting home .
children often experience very similar to those of the common cold and gastroenteritis vomiting and diarrhearting .
dengue fever is usually behind the eyesight , muscle and joint pains , and a rash .
the name " breakbone fever " comes from the muscle and joint pains .
dengue fever is divided into three stages : febrile , critical , and recovery .
the febrile phase usually lasts between two and seven days .
nausea and vomiting may also happen .
a rash occurs in 50 to 80 % of people with symptoms in the first or second day of symptoms as flushed skin , or later in the course of illness .
there is also a rash of " islands of white in a sea of red " .
some petechiaeossaossa produce small red spots that do not disappear when the skin is pressed .
the fever itself is classically biphasic or saddleback in nature , breaking and then returning for one or two days .
in some people , the disease goes into a critical phase as fever resolves .
during this period , plasma is leaked from the blood vessels , lasting one to two days .
this may result in fluid accumulation in the chest and abdominal cavity as well as depletion of fluid from the circulation and decreased blood supply to vital organs .
there may also be organ dysfunction and severe bleeding .
shock syndrome syndrome syndrome syndrome syndrome syndrome syndrome syndrome syndrome syndrome , hemorrhageerate dengue hemorrhagic fever syndrome , occur in less than 5 % of all cases of dengue fever .
this happens in children and young adults .
the recovery phase occurs next , with resorption of the leaked fluid into the bloodstream .
this usually lasts 2 – 3 days .
it can be accompanied with severe itching and a slow heart rate .
another rash may happen with either a maculopapular or a vasculitic appearance , which is followed by peeling of the skin .
during this stage , a fluid overload state may occur .
fatigue may last for weeks in adults .
dengue can sometimes affect other systems , either in isolation or with the dengue symptoms .
a decreased level of consciousness occurs in 0.5 – 6 % of severe cases .
other neurological disorders have been reported in the context of dengue , like transverse myelitis and guillain – barre syndrome .
if the heart and acute liver are not treated , the person who got hepatitis c will get the disease will become infected .
a pregnant woman who has dengue may be at a higher risk of miscarriage as well as low birth weight and premature birth .
dengue fever virus burst is an rna virus of the family flaviviridae .
other members of the same genus include yellow fever virus , west nile virus , zika virus , and the japanese encephalitis virus .
most are transmitted by arthropodsfolk mosquitos or ticks jia .
the dengue virus genome genome genome genomeicative genetic material contains about 11,000 nucleotide bases , which code for the three different types of protein molecules moleculesminating ns1 , ns2b , ns3 , ns4 , ns4 , ns4 , and ns3 .
there are several different types of the virus , called serotypes .
the fifth type was announced in 2013 .
the serotypes are different from their antigenicity .
dengue virus is spread mostly by mosquitoes .
these mosquitos usually live between latitudes of 35 ° north and 35 ° south below an elevation of 1000 m .
they bite during the early morning and in the evening , but they may bite and spread infection at any time of day .
other " aedes " species that transmit the disease include " a . albopictus " , " a . polynesiensis " and " a . scutellaris " .
humans are the primary host of the virus , but it also circulates in nonhuman primates .
infection can be got by a single bite .
a female mosquito that takes a blood meal from a person infected with dengue fever during the first 2-to 10-day febrile period , becomes infected with the virus in the cells lining its gut .
after 8 – 10 days , the virus spreads to other tissues including mosquito 's salivary glands and is subsequently released into its saliva .
the mosquito seems to have no effect on the mosquito , which remains infected for life .
" aedes aegypti " prefers to lay its eggs in artificial water containers , to live close to humans , and to feed on people rather than other vertebrates .
dengue can also be transmitted through infected blood products and through organ donation .
in countries where dengue is endemic , the risk is between 1.6 and 6 per 10,000 transfusions .
vertical transmission parapet from mother to child embryos during pregnancy or at birth has been reported .
other person-to-person modes of transmission have also been reported , but are very unusual .
the genetic variation in dengue virus is region specific .
babies and young children can get severe disease .
other risk factors for severe disease are female sex , high body mass index , and viral load .
each serotype can cause the full spectrum of disease , but virus strain is a risk factor .
infection with one serotype is thought to produce lifelong immunity to that type , but only short-term protection against the other three .
if someone previously exposed to denv-3 acquires denv-2 , the risk of severe disease increases .
dengue can be life-threatening in people with chronic diseases such as diabetes and asthma .
polymorphisms endings occur in particular genes have been linked with an increase in dengue complications .
examples include the genes coding for the proteins tnfα , mannan-binding lectin , ctla4 , tgfβ , dc-sign , plce1 , and particular forms of human leukocyte antigen from gene variations of hla-b .
a common genetic abnormality , especially in africans , is a rare genetic disorder .
polymorphisms in the genes for the vitamin d receptor and fcγr are to offer protection against severe disease in secondary dengue infection .
when a mosquito bites a person , the mosquito will get the dengue virus .
it binds to and enters white blood cells .
the white blood cells react by making a number of proteins , such as cytokines and interferons .
in severe infection , the virus production inside the body is greatly increased .
fluid from the bloodstream leaks into the capillary .
as a result , less blood circulates in the blood vessels , and the blood pressure becomes so low that it grimsby enough blood to vital organs .
dysfunction of the bone marrow due to infection of the stromal cells leads to reduced numbers of platelets , which are necessary for effective blood clotting .
once inside the skin , dengue virus binds to langerhans cells .
the virus enters the cells through binding between viral proteins and membrane proteins on the langerhans cell .
dc-sign , a non-specific receptor for foreign material on dendritic cells , seems to be the main point of entry .
the dendritic cell moves to the nearest lymph node .
the cell 's protein synthesis apparatus produces new viral proteins that replicate the viral rna and begin to form viral particles .
immature virus particles are transported to the golgi apparatus , where some of the proteins get nutrients nutrients .
the now mature new viruses are released by exocytosis .
they then enter other white blood cells , such as monocytes and macrophages .
the initial reaction of infected cells is to produce interferon , a cytokine that raises a number of defenses against viral infection through the innate immune system by augmenting the production of a large group of proteins mediated by the jak-stat pathway .
some serotypes of dengue virus have mechanisms to slow down this process .
interferon also activates the adaptive immune system .
some bind the virus less well and appear instead to deliver the virus into a part of the phagocytes where it is not destroyed .
it is not clear why secondary infection with a different strain of dengue virus places people at risk of dengue hemorrhagic fever and dengue shock syndrome .
the most widely accepted hypothesis is that of antibody-dependent enhancementeses aderford .
the exact mechanism behind ade is unclear .
it may be caused by poor binding of non-neutralizing antibodies and delivery into the wrong compartment of white blood cells that have taken over the virus for destruction .
there is a suspicion that ade is not the only mechanism underlying severe dengue-related complications .
capillary is caused by blood clotting , which is a very severe disease .
these changes appear associated with a disordered state of the endothelial glycocalyx , which acts as a molecular filter of blood components .
leaky capillariesriesriesries fargo and critical phase ɔ are thought to be caused by an immune system response .
other processes of interest include infected cells that become necrotic .
the diagnosis of dengue is usually made clinically , on the basis of reported symptoms and physical examination .
however , early disease can be difficult to tell apart from other viral infections .
a probable diagnosis is based on the findings of fever plus two of the following : nausea and vomiting , rash , generalized pains , low white blood cell count , positive tourniquet test , or any warning sign .
warning signs usually happen before the onset of severe dengue .
the tourniquet test is particularly useful in settings where no laboratory investigations are readily available .
the diagnosis should be considered in anyone who has a fever within two weeks of being in the tropics or subtropics .
it can be difficult to tell the difference between dengue fever and chikungunya .
often , investigations are performed to exclude other conditions that cause similar symptoms , such as malaria , leptospirosis , viral haemorrhagic fever , typhoid fever , meningococcal disease , measles , and influenza .
zika fever also has dengue fever .
the earliest change is a low number of white blood cells .
a moderately high level of aminotransferaseiculate ast and altimantic acid is commonly associated with low platelets and white blood cells .
in severe disease , plasma leakage results in hemoconcentration .
the demonstration of fluid on ultrasound may help in the early identification of dengue shock syndrome .
ultrasound is not easy to use , because there are many things in the same area .
dengue shock syndrome is present if pulse pressure drops to ≤ 20 mm hg along with peripheral vascular collapse .
peripheral vascular collapse is a condition where children can get in their blood pressure from a person 's heart , if they lose their blood pressure .
warning signs are an important thing for early detection of potential serious disease .
in 2009 , the world health organization said that dengue fever is too weak and severe .
this replaces the 1997 who classification , which needed to be simplified as it was found to be too restrictive , though the older classification is still widely used .
severe dengue is defined as that associated with severe bleeding , severe organ dysfunction , or severe plasma leakage while all other cases are uncomplicated .
in 1997 , dengue fever was divided into undifferentiated fever , dengue fever , and dengue hemorrhagic fever .
dengue hemorrhagic fever was further divided into grades i-iv .
grade i is the presence of easy bruising or a positive tourniquet test in someone with fever .
this is called dengue shock syndrome .
dengue fever can be diagnosed with microbiological tests .
this can be done by virus isolation in cell cultures , nucleic acid detection by pcr , viral antigen detection detection detection
however , these tests are not widely available due to their greater cost .
detection of ns1 during the febrile phase of a primary infection may be greater than 90 % sensitive however is only 60 – 80 % in subsequent infections .
all tests may be negative in the early stages of the disease .
pcr and viral antigen detection are more accurate in the first seven days .
in 2012 a pcr test was introduced .
these tests are only of diagnostic value during the acute phase of the illness with the exception of serology .
tests for dengue virus-specific antibodies , types igg and igm can be helpful in confirming a diagnosis in later stages of the infection .
it is produced after 5 – 7 days .
the highest levels are detected following a primary infection .
igm becomes undetectable 30 – 90 days after a primary infection , but earlier after re-infections .
igg , by contrast , remains detectable for over 60 years .
after a primary infection , igg reaches peak levels in the blood after 14 – 21 days .
in later re-infections levels peak earlier and the titres are usually higher .
both igg and igm provide protective immunity to the infecting serotype of the virus .
this may result in a false positive after recent infections or vaccinations with yellow fever virus or japanese encephalitis .
the detection of igg alone is not considered diagnostic unless blood samples are collected 14 days apart .
in a person with symptoms , igm is considered diagnostic .
the mosquito bites it can be treated by removing the mosquito 's control .
the main method of controlling " a . aegypti " is by removing its habitats .
this is done by getting rid of open sources of water , or if this is not possible , by adding insecticides or biological control agents to these areas .
generalized spraying with organophosphate or pyrethroid insecticides , while sometimes done , is not thought to be effective .
reducing open collections of water through environmental modification is the preferred method of control .
people can prevent mosquito bites by wearing clothes that fully cover the skin .
these measures can be effective , but they do little in terms of mitigating the frequency of outbreaks .
the range of the disease also appears to be expanding possibly due to climate change .
in 2016 , a vaccine for dengue fever will be used in the philippines and indonesia .
it has also been approved by the united states , mexico , costa rica , singapore , paraguay , and the united states .
the vaccine is only to be used in people who have previously had dengue infection .
in indonesia it costs about us $ 207 for the recommended three doses .
the vaccine is produced by sanofi .
it is based on a combination of the yellow fever virus and each of the four dengue serotypes .
two studies of a vaccine found it was 60 % effective and prevented more than 80 to 90 % of severe cases .
this is less than wished for by some .
there are many different kinds of dengue fever .
now that there is a fifth serotype this will need to be factored in .
one of the concerns is that a vaccine could increase the risk of severe disease through antibody-dependent enhancement adedillytt .
the ideal vaccine is safe , effective after one or two injections , covers all serotypes , does not contribute to ade , is easily transported and stored , and is both affordable and cost-effective .
international anti-dengue day is on june 15 .
the idea was first agreed upon in 2010 with the first event held in jakarta , indonesia in 2011 .
more than three more events will be held in 2013 in yangon , myanmar and in 2013 in vietnam .
they want to demonstrate the asian region 's commitment in tackling the disease .
there are no specific treatments for dengue fever .
treatment depends on the symptoms .
those who are able to drink , are passing urine , have no warning signs .
people who have other health problems have " warning signs " .
in people with severe dengue care should be given in an area where there is access to an intensive care unit .
if the person has surgery , it is usually only needed for one or two days .
in children with shock due to dengue a rapid dose of 20 ml / kg is reasonable .
the rate of fluid administration is then titrated to a urinary output of 0.5-1 ml / h , stable vital signs and normalization of hematocrit .
the smallest amount of fluid needed to achieve this is recommended .
invasive medical procedures such as nasogastric intubation , intramuscular injections and arterial punctures are avoided , in view of the bleeding risk .
paracetamololicative -lrb- iii -rrb- acetaminophen ƒ is used for fever and discomfort while nsaids such as ibuprofen and aspirin are avoided as they might aggravate the risk of bleeding .
blood transfusion is started early in people having unstable vital signs in the face of a " decreasing hematocrit " , rather than waiting for the hemoglobin concentration to decrease to some predetermined " transfusion trigger " level .
packed red blood cells or whole blood are recommended .
there is not enough evidence to determine if corticosteroids have a positive or negative effect in dengue fever .
during the recovery phase intravenous fluids are discontinued to prevent fluid overload .
if fluid overload occurs and vital signs are stable , stopping further fluid may be all that is needed .
if a person is outside of the critical phase , a loop diuretic such as furosemide may be used to remove extra fluid from the circulation .
most people with dengue fever have problems that keep people sick .
the fatality rate is 1-5 % , and less than 1 % with adequate treatment .
dengue is common in more than 110 countries .
in 2013 it causes about 60 million symptomatic infections worldwide , with 18 % admitted to hospital and about 13,600 deaths .
the cost of dengue fever is about us $ 9 billion .
for the decade of the 2000s , 12 countries in southeast asia have about 3 million infections and 6,000 deaths every year .
in 2019 , the philippines declared a national dengue epidemic .
it is reported in at least 22 countries in africa .
it is one of the most common vector-borne diseases worldwide .
infections are most commonly caused by bacteria .
in recent decades , the expansion of villages , towns and cities in the areas where it is common , and the increased mobility of people has increased the number of epidemics and circulating viruses .
dengue fever was once confined to southeast asia .
dengue increased 30 % between 1960 and 2010 .
this increase is believed to be due to a combination of urbanization , population growth , and increased international travel .
the geographical distribution is around the equator .
2.5 billion people live in areas where dengue happens .
dengue is the second most common cause of fever in the world .
it is the most common viral disease transmitted by arthropods .
the world health organization says that dengue was one of seventeen neglected tropical diseases .
like most arboviruses , dengue virus is kept in cycles that involve preferred blood-sucking vectors and vertebrate hosts .
the viruses are kept in the forests of southeast asia and africa by transmission from female " aedes " mosquitoes .
in towns and cities , the virus is spread by the highly domesticated " a . aegypti " .
in rural settings the virus is transmitted to humans by " aedes " and other species of " aedes " such as " a . albopictus " .
both of these species had expanding ranges in the second half of the 20th century .
in all settings the infected lower primates or humans greatly increase the number of dengue viruses , in a process called amplification .
one projection estimates that climate change , urbanization , and other factors could result in more than 6 billion people at risk of dengue infection by 2080 .
the first record of probable dengue fever is in a chinese medical encyclopedia from the jin dynasty .
the main vector , " a . aegypti " , spread out of africa in the 15th to 19th centuries .
the most likely early reports of dengue epidemics are from 1779 and 1780 .
from that time until 1940 , there were many more epidemics .
in 1907 , dengue was the second diseaseement after yellow fever buys yellow fever .
john burton cleland and joseph franklin siler completed the basic understanding of dengue transmission .
dengue was caused by the effects of ecologic disruption .
different serotypes of the disease have different dengue fever .
it was first reported in the philippines in 1953 .
dengue hemorrhagic fever and dengue shock syndrome were first reported in central america in 1981 .
the word " dengue " is not certain , but it is probably derived from " dinga " in the swahili phrase " ka-dinga pepo " .
in the west indies , slaves in the west indies had dengue posture and gait of a dandy .
the name " breakbone fever " was first used by physician and united states founding father benjamin rush in a 1789 report of the 1780 epidemic in philadelphia .
in the report , he uses the more formal term " bilious remitting fever " .
the term " dengue fever " was first used in 1828 .
other historical terms include " breakheart fever " and " la dengue " .
" philippine " , " singapore hemorrhagic fever " , and " infectious thrombocytopenic purpura " are common causes .
outbreaks of dengue fever increases the need for blood products while decreasing the number of potential blood donors due to potential infection with the virus .
someone who has dengue fever can not donate any of the dengue blood for the next at least six months .
a national dengue day is held in india on may 16 .
it is ongoing to make it a global event .
the philippines has an awareness month in june since 1998 .
research is done to prevent and treat dengue .
with regards to vector control , a number of novel methods have been used to reduce mosquito numbers .
there are also trials with genetically modified male " a . aegypti " that after release into the wild mate with females , and render their offspring unable to fly .
this makes the mosquitos not resistant to dengue virus .
artificially induced infection with wolbachia is effective , but it is unclear if naturally acquired infections are protective .
work is still ongoing as of 2015 to see the best type of wolbachia to use .
there are efforts to develop antiviral drugs that would be used to treat attacks of dengue fever and prevent severe complications .
discovery of the structure of the viral proteins may help the development of effective drugs .
there are several possible targets .
the first approach is to inhibition of the viral rna-dependent rna polymerase coded by ns5 francs , which copies the viral genetic material , with nucleoside analogs .
secondly , it may be possible to develop specific inhibitors of the viral proteasettettettels coded by ns3 c1 , which splices viral proteins .
finally , it may be possible to develop entry inhibitors , which stop the virus entering cells , or inhibitors of the 5 ' capping process , which is required for viral replication .
