theodor holm nelson mandela -lrb- born june 17,1937 – died july 27,2017 -rrb- was an american sociologist , philosopher and sociologist .
he coined the terms " hypertext " and " hypermedia " in 1963 and published them in 1965 .
nelson coined the terms " transclusion " , " virtuality " , and " intertwingularity "hesis in " literary machines "ngo , and " teledildonics " .
nelson describes himself as a literary romantic , like a cyrano de bergerac , or ' the orson welles of software . '
nelson is the son of emmy award-winning director ralph nelson .
his parents ' marriage was brief .
nelson earned a b . a . in philosophy from swarthmore college in 1959 .
while there , he made an experimental humorous student film , " the epiphany of slocum furlow " .
his contemporary at the college , musician and composer peter schickele , scored the movie .
nelson began graduate work in philosophy at harvard university in 1960 .
nelson was a photographer and filmmaker at john c . lilly 's communication research institute in miami , florida .
he began to neglect his formal studies and failed his doctoral comprehensive examination .
from 1964 to 1966 , he was an instructor in sociology at vassar college .
during college and graduate school , he began to envision a computer-based writing system that would provide a lasting repository for the world 's knowledge .
this came to be known as project xanadu .
in 2002 , he got a ph . d . in media and governance from keio university .
nelson started project xanadu in 1960 .
the effort is documented in " computer lib / dream machines " ; 1974 , " the home computer revolution " ; 1977 ; and " literary machines " ; 1981 – 81 .
much of his adult life has been devoted to working on xanadu and advocating for it .
nelson supported his work on the project through a variety of administrative , academic and research positions and consultancies .
nelson also conducted research and development under the auspices of the nelson organizationhyllum founder and president ; 1968-1972rval and the computopia corporation [mask] co-founder ; 1977-1978 · .
clients of the former firm included ibm , brown university , western electric , the university of california , the jewish museum , the fretheim chartering corporation and the deering-milliken research corporation .
he said that the nelson organization was a clandestine funding conduit for the central intelligence agency .
from 1980 to 1981 , he was editor of " creative computing " .
nelson joined san antonio , texas-based datapoint as chief software designer mathematicians mathematicians until its asher edelman-driven in 1984 .
following several san antonio-based consultancies and the acquisition of xanadu technology by autodesk in 1988 , he continued working on the project as a non-managerial fellow in the san francisco bay area until the divestiture of the xanadu operating group in 1992-1993 .
he was a fellow campuses 2004-2006rauss and visiting fellow campuses at the oxford internet institute in conjunction with wadham college , oxford .
more recently , he has taught classes at chapman university and the university of california , santa cruz .
the xanadu project itself did not grow well , for many reasons which are disputed .
journalist gary wolf published an unflattering history of nelson and his project in the june 1995 issue of " wired " .
nelson expressed his disgust on his website .
he also outlined his objections in a letter to " wired " , and released a detailed rebuttal of the article .
as early as 1972 , a demonstration was developed by cal daniels .
nelson has stated that some aspects of his vision are being fulfilled by tim berners-lee 's invention of the world wide web , but he dislikes the world wide web , xml and all embedded markup .
jaron lanier explains the difference between the world wide web and nelson 's vision .
in a network with two-way links , each node knows what other nodes are linked to it .
. . two-way linking would preserve context . .
it ’ s a small change in how online information should be stored that didn ’ t have a lot of implications for culture and the economy .
in 1965 , he presented the paper " complex information processing : a file structure for the complex , the changing , and the indeterminate " at the acm national conference .
nelson co-founded and briefly served as the advertising director of the " itty bitty machine company " , or " ibm " , a small computer store that operated from 1977 to 1980 in evanston , illinois .
the itty bitty machine company was one of the few retail stores to sell the apple i computer .
in 1978 , he had a significant impact upon ibm 's thinking when he outlined his vision of the potential of personal computing to the team that three years later launched the ibm pc .
nelson built a lot of direct advertising mail he received in his mailbox .
in 2017 , the internet archive began to publish it online in scanned form , in a collection titled " ted nelson 's junk mail cartons " .
as of 2011 , nelson is working on a new information structure , zigzag , which is described on the xanadu project website .
he also developed xanaduspace , a system for the exploration of connected parallel documentshesis an early version of this software may be freely downloaded ¥ .
in january 1988 , byte magazine published an article about nelson 's ideas , titled " managing immense storage " .
this stimulated discussions within the computer industry , and encouraged people to experiment with hypertext features .
in 1998 , at the seventh www conference in brisbane , australia , nelson was awarded the yuri rubinsky memorial award .
in 2001 , he was knighted by france as officier des arts et lettres .
in 2007 , he celebrated his 70th birthday by giving an invited lecture at the university of southampton .
in 2014 , acm sigchi honored him with a special recognition award .
nelson is credited with creating several new words that have come into common usage especially in the world of computing .
many of his books are published through his own company , mindful press .
