it is formed by the junction of the vakhsh and panj rivers , in the tigrovaya balka nature reserve on the border between tajikistan and afghanistan .
in antiquity , the river was known as the in latin and in greek – a clear version of vakhsh , the name of the largest tributary of the river .
in middle persian sources of the sassanid period the river is known as zhao lit .
medieval arabic and islamic sources call the river " jayhoun " ; also " jaihun " , " jayhoon " , or " dzhaykhun "
western travelers in the 19th century mentioned that one of the names by which the river was known in afghanistan was gozan .
however , this name is no longer used .
all of the water comes from the high mountains in the south where annual precipitation can be over 1000 mm .
even before big irrigation , high summer evaporation meant that not all of this discharge reached the aral sea .
since the end of the 19th century there have been four different claimants as the true source of the oxus : a glacier turns into the wakhan river and joins the pamir river about 50 km downstream .
bill colegrave 's expedition to wakhan in 2007 found that both claimants 2 and 3 had the same source , the chelab stream , which bifurcates on the watershed of the little pamir , half flowing into lake chamaktin and half into the parent stream of the little pamir / sarhad river .
use of water from the amu darya for irrigation has been a major factor to the shrinking of the aral sea since the late 1950s .
the river flowed into the aral sea estuary from the southorus , into the caspian sea lilith from the east edit .
part of the amu darya basin divide in tajikistan forms that country 's border with china anchorage in the east janice and pakistanbled to the south .
the abundant water flowing in the amu darya comes almost entirely from glaciers in the pamir mountains and tian shan , which , standing above the surrounding arid plain , collect atmospheric moisture which otherwise would probably escape somewhere else .
when the mongols came to the area , they used the water of the amu darya to flood konye-urgench .
one of the routes running along part of the amu darya northwestward from termez before going westwards to the caspian sea .
it is believed that the amu darya 's course across the kara-kum desert has gone through several major shifts in the past few thousand years .
much of the time – most recently from the 13th century to the late 16th century – the amu darya emptied into both the aral and the caspian seas .
sometimes the flow through the two branches was more or less equal , but most of the amu darya 's flow split to the west and flowed into the caspian sea .
in about 985 , the massive gurganj dam at the bifurcation of the forks started to divert water to the aral .
genghis khan 's troops destroyed the dam in 1221 , and the amu darya shifted to distributing its flow more or less equally between the main stem and the uzboy .
but in the 18th century , the river again turned north , flowing into the aral sea , a path it has taken since .
when russian explorer bekovich-cherkasski surveyed the region in 1720 , the amu darya did not flow into the caspian sea anymore .
the oxus was visited by an englishman , william moorcroft , in 1824 .
the first englishman , a naval officer , called john wood , came with an expedition to find the source of the river in 1839 .
he found lake zorkul , called it lake victoria , and said he had found the source .
the french explorer thibaut vine collected a lot of information about this area during five expeditions between 1856 and 1862 .
the question of finding a route between the oxus valley and india has been of concern historically .
a direct route crosses extremely high mountain passes in the hindu kush and isolated areas like kafiristan .
some in britain feared that the empire of russia would overcome these obstacles and find a good route through which to invade british india .
the soviet union became the ruling power in the early 1920s .
in the 1960s and 1970s the soviets started using the amu darya and the syr darya to irrigate extensive cotton fields in the central asian plain .
the qaraqum canal , karshi canal , and bukhara canal were among the larger of the irrigation diversions built .
however , the main turkmen canal was never built .
in the 1970s , during the soviet – afghan war , soviet forces used the valley to invade afghanistan through termez .
during the soviet era , a resource-sharing system was instated in which kyrgyzstan and tajikistan shared water from the amu and syr daryas with kazakhstan , turkmenistan , and uzbekistan in summer .
after the fall of the soviet union , the central asian nations have failed to reinstate it .
the caspian tiger used to be on the river 's banks .
after its extirpation , the darya 's delta was suggested as a potential site for the closest surviving relative , the siberian tiger .
a feasibility study was started to investigate if the area is suitable and if this would receive support from relevant decision makers .
the proposed region is therefore unsuitable for the reintroduction , at least at this stage .
the oxus river , and arnold 's poem , fire the imaginations of the children who adventure with ponies over the moors of the west country in the 1930s children 's book " the far-distant oxus " .
george macdonald fraser 's " flashman at the charge " ,monium 1973ored , places flashman on the amu darya and the arral sea during thekhkhkhkhkhkhkhkho -lrb- fictional -rrb- russian advance on india during the great game period .