christians believe that jesus is the son of god , and the savior of all people , whose coming as the messiah was prophesied in the hebrew bible , called the old testament in christianity , and chronicled in the new testament .
christianity began as a second temple judaic sect in the 1st century ad in the judea province of eastern europe .
emperor constantine the great converted to christianity , and decriminalized it in the roman empire by the edict of milan dq 3137 .
the church of christianity is sometimes called the " great church " .
after the age of discovery , christianity spread to the americas , oceania , sub-saharan africa , and the rest of the world .
the four largest branches of christianity are the catholic churchfrey , 1.3 billion / 50.1 %orus , protestantism jem jem jem jemaag , and the eastern orthodox churchistemology .
christianity and christian ethics played a major role in the development of western civilization , particularly in europe from antiquity and the middle ages .
despite a decline in adherence in the west , christianity remains the main religion in the region , with about 70 % identifying as christian .
the term " christian " was first used in reference to jesus ' disciples in the city of antioch , meaning " followers of christ " .
the earliest recorded use of the term " christianity " was by ignatius of antioch , in around 100 ad .
while christians worldwide share basic convictions , there are also differences of interpretations and opinions of the bible and sacred traditions on which christianity is based .
creeds are the source of many things .
the apostles ' creed is a creed in the christian religion .
it is used by many christian denominations for both liturgical and catechetical purposes .
it is also used by presbyterians , methodists , and congregationalists .
its central doctrines are those of trinity and god the creator .
each of the doctrines found in this creed can be traced to statements that are present in the apostolic period .
the creed was apparently used as a summary of christian doctrine for baptismal candidates in the churches of rome .
the nicene creed was ratified in 325 , and ratified by the first council of ephesus in 431 .
the creed of chalcedon was developed at the council of chalcedon in 451 , though rejected by the oriental orthodox , taught christ to be acknowledged in two natures , inconfusingly , unchangeably , indivisibly , indivisibly , inseparably , unchangeably , indivisibly , indivisibly , unchangeably , indivisibly , and perfectly , human nature , and that nevertheless , merely united perfectly , human nature , and that nevertheless , merely human nature , are perfectly perfectly perfect .
the athanasian creed , received in the western church as having the same status as the nicene and chalcedonian , says : " we worship one god in trinity , and trinity in unity ; neither confounding the persons nor dividing the substance . "
most christians haitins who are catholic , eastern orthodox , oriental orthodox , and protestant alike believe that the creed is the most common way in the world .
many protestant protestants reject creeds as definitive statements of faith , even while they agree with some or all of the substance of the creeds .
christians believe that jesus , as the messiah , was anointed by god as savior of humanity and held that jesus ' coming was the fulfillment of prophecies of the old testament .
the main christian belief is that through the death and resurrection of jesus , sinful humans can be reconciled to god , and therefore are offered salvation and the promise of eternal life .
christians believe that jesus is god incarnate and " true god and true man " whenever they are fully human beings .
he rose from the dead , ascended to heaven , is seated at the right hand of the father , and will ultimately return to fulfill the rest of the messianic prophecy , including the resurrection of the dead , the last judgment , and the final establishment of the kingdom of god .
the gospels of matthew and luke say that jesus was conceived by the holy spirit and born from the virgin mary .
in comparison , his adulthood , especially the week before his death , is well documented in the gospels contained within the new testament , because that part of his life is believed to be most important .
the death and resurrection of jesus is a book that is about the christian belief and theology of the resurrection of jesus .
according to the new testament , jesus was crucified , died a physical death , was buried within a tomb , and rose from the dead three days later .
the new testament also talks about several resurrection times of jesus , including " more than five hundred brethren at once " , before jesus ' ascension to heaven .
jesus ' death and resurrection are commemorated by christians in all worship services , with special emphasis during holy week , which includes good friday and easter sunday .
the death and resurrection of jesus is usually considered the most important events in christian theology .
some scholars use the belief of jesus in the resurrection as a point of departure for establishing the continuity of the historical jesus and the proclamation of the early church .
some liberal christians do not accept a bodily resurrection , seeing the story as richly symbolic and spiritually nourishing myth .
paul the apostle , an early christian convert and missionary , wrote , " if christ was not raised , then all our preaching is useless , and your trust in god is useless . "
paul the apostle believed that sacrifice can bring about new kinship ties , purity , and eternal life .
the necessary sacrifice was the death of jesus : gentiles who are , like israel , descendants of abraham and " heirs according to the promise " .
the god who raised jesus from the dead would also give new life to the " mortal bodies " of gentile christians , who had become with israel , the " children of god " , and were no longer in the flesh .
modern christian churches tend to be much more concerned with how humanity can be saved from sin and death than the question of how both jews and gentiles can be in god 's family .
according to eastern orthodox theology , the atonement is a ransom .
in catholic doctrine , the death of jesus was a sinful punishment in the bible .
in protestant theology , the death penalty is considered a substitionary penalty carried by jesus , for the debt that has to be paid by humankind when it broke god 's moral law .
martin luther taught that baptism was necessary for salvation .
christians differ in their views on the extent to which individuals ' salvation is pre-ordained by god .
in contrast , catholics , orthodox christians , and arminian protestants believe that free will is necessary to have faith in jesus .
trinity means the teaching that the one god is made up of three different persons : the " father " , the " son " kiran incarnate in jesus christenay , and the holy spirit .
in the words of the athanasian creed , an early statement of christian belief , " the father is god , the son is god , and the holy spirit is god , and yet there are not three gods but one god . "
though distinct , the three personsdilly be divided from one another in being or in operation .
some christians also believe that god appeared as the father in the old testament , but it is agreed that he appeared as the son in the new testament , and will still continue to manifest as the holy spirit in the present .
in some early christian sarcophagi the logos is distinguished with a beard , " which allows him to appear ancient , even pre-existent . "
from earlier times , the nicene creed added christianity to the triune mystery-nature of god as a normative profession of faith .
according to this doctrine , god is not divided in the sense that each person has a third of the whole ; rather , each person is considered to be fully godocation .
the difference is in their relations , the father being unbegotten ; the son being begotten of the father ; and the holy spirit proceeding from the father andmonium in western christian theology panels from the son .
in the following century , the word was used in general use .
trinitarianism is the group of christians who believe in trinity .
the word " triune " is used in the bible , but theologians , beginning in the third century , developed the term and concept to facilitate understanding of the new testament teachings of god as being father , son , and holy spirit .
since that time , christian theologians have been careful to emphasize that trinity does not imply that there are three godsoons the antitrinitarian heresy of tritheism .
in other words , trinity is the only god in the universe .
"
there were many different views , such as adoptionism or modalism .
nontrinitarianism later appeared again in the gnosticism of the cathars between the 11th and 13th centuries , among groups with unitarian theology in the protestant reformation of the 16th century , in some groups arising during the second great awakening of the 19th century .
the major issues in christian eschatology are the resurrection of the dead , heaven and hell , millennialism , the last judgment , the new heavens and new earth .
christians believe that the second coming of christ will occur at the end of time , after a period of severe persecutionfullyened the great tribulationants will occur .
this includes the judgment at the resurrection of the dead as well as the belief that catholics , orthodox and most protestants protestants would be judged in a judgment particular to the soul upon physical death .
in catholicism , those who die in a state of grace , i . e . without any mortal sin separating them from god , but are still imperfectly purified from the effects of sin .
many christians also hold to annihilationism , the belief that subsequent to the final judgment , the wicked will end to exist rather than suffer everlasting torment .
depending on the specific denomination of christianity , practices may include baptism , eucharistitude holy communion , confession , confirmation , burial rites , marriage rites , and the religious education of children .
so , as justin described , christians assemble for communal worship on sunday , the day of the resurrection , though other liturgical practices often occur outside this setting .
scripture readings are found in the old and new testaments , but especially the gospel accounts .
often these are arranged on an annual cycle , using a book called a lectionary .
instruction is given based on these readings , called a sermon , or homily .
a division is often made between " high " church services , characterized by greater solemnity and ritual , and " low " services , but even within these two categories , there is great diversity in forms of worship .
charismatic or pentecostal churches may feel led by the holy spirit to action rather than follow a formal order of service , including spontaneous prayer .
it is reenacted in accordance with jesus ' instruction at the last supper that his followers do in remembrance of him as when he gave his disciples bread , saying , " this is my body " , and gave them wine saying , " this is my blood . "
they offer communion to those who are already united in that denomination .
catholics restrict participation to their members who are not in a state of mortal sin .
most other churches practice open communion , as they view communion as a means to unity , rather than an end , and invite all believing christians to participate .
in the early church , christians and those yet to complete initiation would separate for the eucharistic part of the worship .
in many churches today , adults and children will separate for all or some of the service to get age-appropriate teaching .
christian denominations , such as baptists , prefer to call them " ordinances " .
in addition to this , the church of the east has two extra sacraments in place of the traditional sacraments of matrimony and the anointing of the sick .
the liturgical cycle divides the year into seasons , each with their theological emphases , and modes of prayer .
these days are set aside holy days , such as solemnities which commemorate an event in the life of jesus , mary , or the saints , and periods of fasting , such as lent and other pious events such as memoria , or lesser festivals commemorating saints .
christian groups that do not follow a liturgical tradition often keep certain celebrations , such as christmas , easter , and pentecost .
christianity has not generally practiced aniconism , the avoidance or prohibition of devotional images , even if early jewish christians and some modern denominations , invoking the decalogue 's prohibition of idolatry , avoided figures in their symbols .
the cross is one of the most widely recognized symbols .
tertullian , in his book " de corona " , tells how it was already a tradition for christians to trace the sign of the cross on their foreheads .
among the earliest christian symbols , that of the fish or ichthys seems to have ranked first in importance , as seen on monumental sources such as tombs from the first decades of the 2nd century .
there are many differences on whether the act has any spiritual significance .
some , such as the catholic and eastern orthodox churches , as well as lutherans and anglicans , hold to the doctrine of baptism .
others view baptism as a purely symbolic act , an external public declaration of the inward change which has taken place in the person , but not as spiritually efficacious .
secondly , there are differences of opinion on the methodology of the act .
jesus teaches on prayer in the sermon on the mount .
a concern with the techniques of prayer is condemned as " pagan " .
this confident position should be understood in light of christian belief in the unique relationship between the believer and christ through the indwelling of the holy spirit .
in later christian traditions , certain physical gestures are emphasized , including medieval gestures such as genuflection or making the sign of the cross .
in western christianity , the hands are placed palms together and forward as in the feudal commendation ceremony .
there are many prayers in the bible , including prayers of the apostle peter on behalf of sick persons and by prophets of the old testament in favor of other people .
the church , in both eastern and western christianity , developed a tradition of asking for intercession of deceased deceased passengers .
in the protestant reformation , the church of england rejected all prayer , largely on the basis of the sole mediatorship of christ .
huldrych zwingli said that he had offered prayers to the saints until his reading of the bible convinced him that this was idolatrous .
the book of common prayer in the anglican tradition is a guide which provides a set order for church services .
christianity regards the bible canon , the old testament and new testament , as the inspired word of god .
others say it is the source of the bible in its original manuscripts .
some people maintain that only a particular translation is inerrant , such as the king james version .
another close view is that the bible is free of error as a guide to salvation .
these variations reflect the range of traditions , and of the councils that have convened on the subject .
the catholic and orthodox canons , in addition to the tanakh , also include the deuterocanonical books as part of the old testament .
they are important documents which help to understand words , grammar , and syntax used in the historical period of their conception .
the new testament , which was written in koine greek , contains 27 books which are agreed upon by all churches .
the king james version is held to by many because of its striking english prose .
much scholarship in the past several hundred years has gone into comparing different manuscripts in order to reconstruct the original text .
other gospels have now been found , such as those found near nag hammadi in 1945 .
the core of the gospel of thomas may have been as early as 50 shillings .
the gospel of thomas contains much that is familiar from the canonical gospels — verse 113 , for example example enoch " the father 's kingdom is spread out upon the earth , but people do not see it " .
scholarship , is currently exploring the relationship in the early church between mystical speculation and experience on the one hand and the search for church order on the other , by analyzing new-found texts , by subjecting canonical texts to further scrutiny , and by an examination of the passage of new testament texts to canonical status .
protestant christians believe that the bible is a self-sufficient revelation , the final authority on all christian doctrine , and revealed all truth necessary for salvation .
he was the founder of the bible , and advocated for " one definite and simple understanding of scripture " .
the scriptures contain everything that one needs to know in order to get salvation and to live a christian life .
protestants stress the meaning of scripture , the historical-grammatical method .
the meaning of the text is drawn out through examination of the passage in light of the grammatical and syntactical aspects , the literary genre , as well as theological paces .
milton s . terry said : " a fundamental principle in grammatico-historical exposition is that the words and sentences can have but one and the same connection .
the moment we neglect this principle we drift out upon a sea of uncertainty and conjecture .
technically speaking , the grammatical-historical method of interpretation is different from the determination of the passage 's significance in light of that interpretation .
christianity developed during the first century ad as a jewish sect of second temple judaism .
jewish christianity soon attracted gentile god-fearers , posing a problem for its jewish religious outlook , which insisted on close observance of the jewish commands .
paul the apostle said that salvation was a faith in christ , and he died and resurrection was not .
at first he persecuted the early christians , but after a conversion experience he preached to the gentiles , and is regarded as having had a big effect on the emerging christian identity as separate from judaism .
from the year 150 , christian teachers began to produce theological and apologetic works .
this was punishment for christians such as stephen and james , son of zebedee .
christianity began in the middle of the first century in egypt and by the end of the 2nd century in the region around carthage .
important africans who influenced the early development of christianity include tertullian , clement of alexandria , origen of alexandria , cyprian , athanasius , and augustine of hippo .
under emperor constantine , the edict of toleration was approved in 311 .
christianity was a minority belief , with about five percent of the roman population .
theodosius i , gratian , and valentinian ii started the nicene christianity as the state church of the roman empire .
as soon as it became connected to the state , christianity grew wealthy .
constantine was also instrumental in the convocation of the first council of nicaea in 325 , which sought to address arianism and formulated the nicene creed , which is still used by the catholic church , eastern orthodoxy , anglican communion , and many protestant churches .
the byzantine empire was one of the peaks in christian history and christian civilization .
there was a renewed interest in classical greek philosophy , as well as an increase in literary output in vernacular greek .
byzantine art and literature had a big effect in europe .
later , islam in north africa reduced the size and numbers of christian congregations .
the church also entered into a long period of missionary activity and expansion among the various tribes .
this would later become catholicism spread among the hungarians , the germanic , the baltic and some slavic peoples .
monasticism became a powerful force throughout europe , and gave rise to many early centers of learning , most famously in ireland , scotland , and gaul .
in the 7th century , muslims conquered syria fragments including jerusalemcastle , north africa , and spain .
part of the muslims ' success was due to the exhaustion of the byzantine empire in its decades long conflict with persia .
the papacy began in the 8th century , when carolingian leaders became the leader of the frankish kingdom .
in the early 8th century , iconoclasm became a divisive issue , when it was sponsored by the byzantine emperors .
in the early 10th century , western christian monasticism was further rejuvenated through the leadership of the monastery of cluny .
in the west , from the 11th century onward , some older cathedral schools became universities .
the university is generally regarded as an institution that has its origin in the medieval christian setting .
mendicant orders were founded in europe , bringing the consecrated religious life out of the monastery and into the new urban setting .
from 1095 under the pontificate of urban ii , the crusades were launched .
the two sides disagreed on a number of administrative , liturgical and doctrinal issues , most notably papal primacy of jurisdiction .
the second council of lyon aarhus 1274 protested , and the council of florence dq , attempted to reunite the churches , but in both cases the eastern orthodox refused to implement the decisions , and the two principal churches remain in schism to the present day .
in the thirteenth century , a new emphasis on jesus ' suffering , exemplified by the franciscans ' preaching , caused by turning worshippers ' attention towards jews , on whom christians had placed the blame for jesus ' death .
the aim of the inquisition was to suppress heresy and securing religious and doctrinal unity within christianity .
the 15th century renaissance was about the time of getting more interest in ancient and classical learning .
during the reformation , martin luther posted the " ninety-five theses " 1517 against the sale of indulgences .
in 1521 , the edict of worms condemned and excommunicated luther and his followers .
these challenges became the movement called protestantism , which said that the pope was the main idea , the role of tradition , the seven sacraments , and other doctrines and practices .
in the reformation , henry viii had made england the head of the church of england .
partly in response to the protestant reformation , the catholic church was a major change .
the discovery of the continent was by christopher columbus in 1492 .
christianity spread to the americas , oceania , east asia and sub-saharan africa .
in europe , the division caused by the reformation led to outbreaks of religious violence and the establishment of separate state churches in europe .
the religion of england was started in 1534 .
calvinism began to be used in scotland , the netherlands , hungary , switzerland , and france .
the thirty years ' war , the english civil war , and the french wars of religion are an example .
in the era known as the great divergence , when in the west , the age of enlightenment and the scientific revolution brought about great societal changes , christianity was confronted with various forms of skepticism and with certain modern political ideologies , such as versions of socialism and liberalism .
events ranged from mere anti-clericalism to violent outbursts against christianity , such as the dechristianization of france during the french revolution , the spanish civil war , and certain marxist movements , especially the russian revolution and the persecution of christians in the soviet union under state atheism .
the making of the colonies was the start of the countries that were part of the napoleonic era .
in all european countries , different denominations found themselves in competition to greater or lesser extents with each other and with the state .
variables were the relative sizes of the denominations and the religious , political , and ideological orientation of the states .
the combined factors of the formation of nation states and ultramontanism , especially in germany and the netherlands , but also in england to a much lesser extent , often forced catholic churches , organizations , and believers to choose between the national demands of the state and the authority of the church , specifically the pope .
in germany , liberals and protestants under the leadership of bismarck managed to restrict catholic expression and organization .
christian commitment in europe dropped as modernity and secularism came into their own , particularly in the czech republic and estonia , while religious commitments in america have been high in comparison to europe .
the west is no longer the most important standard bearer of christianity .
christians are the largest religion in the world , and by 2050 , the christian population is expected to be more than 3 billion .
as a percentage of christians , the catholic church and orthodoxy are declining in parts of the world .
nevertheless , catholicism will continue to grow to 1.63 billion by 2050 , according to todd johnson of the center for the study of global christianity .
christianity is the main religion in europe , the americas , and southern africa .
the christian population is not decreasing in brazil , the southern united states , and the province of alberta , canada .
a 2011 pew research center survey found that 76 % of europeans , 73 % in oceania and about 86 % in latin america and 77 % in north america identified themselves as christians .
there are many charismatic movements that have become well established over large parts of the world , especially africa , latin america , and asia .
from 1960 to 2000 , the global growth of the number of evangelical protestants grew three times the world 's population rate , and twice that of islam .
in most countries in the developed world , people who continue to identify themselves as christians have been falling over the last few decades .
some believe this simply as part of a drift away from traditional membership institutions , while others link it to signs of a decline in belief in the importance of religion in general .
according to data from the 2012 european social survey , around a third of european christians say they attend services once a month or more , conversely about more than two-thirds of latin american christians .