christianity is an abrahamic religion .
christians believe that jesus is the son of god , and the savior of all people , whose coming as the messiah was prophesied in the hebrew bible , called the old testament in christianity , and chronicled in the new testament .
it is the largest religion in the world .
christianity began as a second temple judaic sect in the 1st century ad in the judea province of eastern europe .
jesus ' apostles and their followers spread around syria , the levant , europe , anatolia , mesopotamia , transcaucasia , egypt , and ethiopia , despite initial persecution .
after the fall of jerusalem , jerusalem became a religion .
emperor constantine the great converted to christianity , and decriminalized it in the roman empire by the edict of milan dq 3137 .
the church of christianity is sometimes called the " great church " .
the eastern orthodox church and the catholic church separated in the east – west schismatics , especially over the authority of the bishop of rome .
protestantism split in numerous denominations from the catholic church in the reformation fragments of the church .
after the age of discovery , christianity spread to the americas , oceania , sub-saharan africa , and the rest of the world .
christianity is culturally diverse in its western and eastern branches .
the four largest branches of christianity are the catholic churchfrey , 1.3 billion / 50.1 %orus , protestantism jem jem jem jemaag , and the eastern orthodox churchistemology .
they are the son of god , who died on a cross , but rose from the dead for the salvation of mankind .
the book describes the four books of matthew , mark , luke and john with the jewish old testament as the gospel 's respected background .
christianity and christian ethics played a major role in the development of western civilization , particularly in europe from antiquity and the middle ages .
despite a decline in adherence in the west , christianity remains the main religion in the region , with about 70 % identifying as christian .
christianity is growing in africa and asia .
in the new testament , the people were known among themselves as brethren , the faithful , elect , saints and believers .
early jewish christians referred to themselves as ' the way ' , probably coming from , " prepare the way of the lord . "
the term " christian " was first used in reference to jesus ' disciples in the city of antioch , meaning " followers of christ " .
the earliest recorded use of the term " christianity " was by ignatius of antioch , in around 100 ad .
while christians worldwide share basic convictions , there are also differences of interpretations and opinions of the bible and sacred traditions on which christianity is based .
creeds are the source of many things .
they began as baptismal formulae .
the apostles ' creed is a creed in the christian religion .
it is used by many christian denominations for both liturgical and catechetical purposes .
it is also used by presbyterians , methodists , and congregationalists .
this creed was developed between the 2nd and 9th centuries .
its central doctrines are those of trinity and god the creator .
each of the doctrines found in this creed can be traced to statements that are present in the apostolic period .
the creed was apparently used as a summary of christian doctrine for baptismal candidates in the churches of rome .
the nicene creed was ratified in 325 , and ratified by the first council of ephesus in 431 .
the creed of chalcedon was developed at the council of chalcedon in 451 , though rejected by the oriental orthodox , taught christ to be acknowledged in two natures , inconfusingly , unchangeably , indivisibly , indivisibly , inseparably , unchangeably , indivisibly , indivisibly , unchangeably , indivisibly , and perfectly , human nature , and that nevertheless , merely united perfectly , human nature , and that nevertheless , merely human nature , are perfectly perfectly perfect .
the athanasian creed , received in the western church as having the same status as the nicene and chalcedonian , says : " we worship one god in trinity , and trinity in unity ; neither confounding the persons nor dividing the substance . "
most christians haitins who are catholic , eastern orthodox , oriental orthodox , and protestant alike believe that the creed is the most common way in the world .
many protestant protestants reject creeds as definitive statements of faith , even while they agree with some or all of the substance of the creeds .
most baptists do not use creeds .
they reject creeds , which are groups with roots in the restoration movement , such as the christian church bethel disciples of christsmith , the evangelical christian church in canada , and the churches of christ .
the tenet of christianity is the belief in jesus as the son of god and the messiahhdi christened .
christians believe that jesus , as the messiah , was anointed by god as savior of humanity and held that jesus ' coming was the fulfillment of prophecies of the old testament .
the christian concept of the messiah is different from the contemporary jewish concept .
the main christian belief is that through the death and resurrection of jesus , sinful humans can be reconciled to god , and therefore are offered salvation and the promise of eternal life .
christians believe that jesus is god incarnate and " true god and true man " whenever they are fully human beings .
jesus suffered the pains and temptations of a mortal man , but did not sin .
as fully god , he rose to life again .
he rose from the dead , ascended to heaven , is seated at the right hand of the father , and will ultimately return to fulfill the rest of the messianic prophecy , including the resurrection of the dead , the last judgment , and the final establishment of the kingdom of god .
the gospels of matthew and luke say that jesus was conceived by the holy spirit and born from the virgin mary .
little of jesus ' childhood is recorded in the canonical gospels , although infancy gospels were popular in antiquity .
in comparison , his adulthood , especially the week before his death , is well documented in the gospels contained within the new testament , because that part of his life is believed to be most important .
the bible says that jesus was born in the bible , his baptism , miracles , preaching , teaching , and deeds .
christians consider the resurrection of jesus to be the cornerstone of their faith faith .
the death and resurrection of jesus is a book that is about the christian belief and theology of the resurrection of jesus .
according to the new testament , jesus was crucified , died a physical death , was buried within a tomb , and rose from the dead three days later .
the new testament also talks about several resurrection times of jesus , including " more than five hundred brethren at once " , before jesus ' ascension to heaven .
jesus ' death and resurrection are commemorated by christians in all worship services , with special emphasis during holy week , which includes good friday and easter sunday .
the death and resurrection of jesus is usually considered the most important events in christian theology .
christian churches accept and teach the new testament account of the resurrection of jesus .
some scholars use the belief of jesus in the resurrection as a point of departure for establishing the continuity of the historical jesus and the proclamation of the early church .
some liberal christians do not accept a bodily resurrection , seeing the story as richly symbolic and spiritually nourishing myth .
arguments over death and resurrection are common at many religious debates and interfaith dialogues .
paul the apostle , an early christian convert and missionary , wrote , " if christ was not raised , then all our preaching is useless , and your trust in god is useless . "
paul the apostle believed that sacrifice can bring about new kinship ties , purity , and eternal life .
the necessary sacrifice was the death of jesus : gentiles who are , like israel , descendants of abraham and " heirs according to the promise " .
the god who raised jesus from the dead would also give new life to the " mortal bodies " of gentile christians , who had become with israel , the " children of god " , and were no longer in the flesh .
modern christian churches tend to be much more concerned with how humanity can be saved from sin and death than the question of how both jews and gentiles can be in god 's family .
according to eastern orthodox theology , the atonement is a ransom .
this restores the relation with god , who is loving and reaches out to humanity , and offers the possibility of " theosis " c . q . divinization , becoming the kind of humans god wants humanity to be .
in catholic doctrine , the death of jesus was a sinful punishment in the bible .
in the catholic church , salvation is not a part of the christian religion .
in protestant theology , the death penalty is considered a substitionary penalty carried by jesus , for the debt that has to be paid by humankind when it broke god 's moral law .
martin luther taught that baptism was necessary for salvation .
christians differ in their views on the extent to which individuals ' salvation is pre-ordained by god .
reformed theology teaches that grace is completely incapable of self-redemption , but that sanctification is irresistible .
in contrast , catholics , orthodox christians , and arminian protestants believe that free will is necessary to have faith in jesus .
trinity means the teaching that the one god is made up of three different persons : the " father " , the " son " kiran incarnate in jesus christenay , and the holy spirit .
together , these three persons are sometimes called the godhead .
in the words of the athanasian creed , an early statement of christian belief , " the father is god , the son is god , and the holy spirit is god , and yet there are not three gods but one god . "
the son is begotten of the father , and the spirit proceeds from the father .
though distinct , the three personsdilly be divided from one another in being or in operation .
some christians also believe that god appeared as the father in the old testament , but it is agreed that he appeared as the son in the new testament , and will still continue to manifest as the holy spirit in the present .
but still , god still existed as three persons in each of these times .
in paintings , the son typically has the distinctive appearance , a cruciform halo identifying christ , and in depictions of the garden of eden , this looks forward to an incarnation .
in some early christian sarcophagi the logos is distinguished with a beard , " which allows him to appear ancient , even pre-existent . "
trinity is an important idea in christianity .
from earlier times , the nicene creed added christianity to the triune mystery-nature of god as a normative profession of faith .
according to roger e . olson and christopher hall , through prayer , meditation , study and practice , the christian community concluded " that god must exist as both a unity and trinity " .
according to this doctrine , god is not divided in the sense that each person has a third of the whole ; rather , each person is considered to be fully godocation .
the difference is in their relations , the father being unbegotten ; the son being begotten of the father ; and the holy spirit proceeding from the father andmonium in western christian theology panels from the son .
the three persons are called eternal and omnipotent .
other religions , including unitarian universalism , jehovah 's witnesses , and mormonism , do not share those views on the trinity .
the greek word " trias " is first seen in this sense in the works of theophilus of antioch ; his text reads : " of the trinity , of god , and of his word , and of his wisdom " .
the term may have been in use before this time .
in the following century , the word was used in general use .
it is found in many passages of origen .
trinitarianism is the group of christians who believe in trinity .
most christian denominations and churches believe this .
the word " triune " is used in the bible , but theologians , beginning in the third century , developed the term and concept to facilitate understanding of the new testament teachings of god as being father , son , and holy spirit .
since that time , christian theologians have been careful to emphasize that trinity does not imply that there are three godsoons the antitrinitarian heresy of tritheism .
in other words , trinity is the only god in the universe .
" nontrinitarianism " is theology that rejects the doctrine of trinity .
there were many different views , such as adoptionism or modalism .
nontrinitarianism later appeared again in the gnosticism of the cathars between the 11th and 13th centuries , among groups with unitarian theology in the protestant reformation of the 16th century , in some groups arising during the second great awakening of the 19th century .
the end of things is the study of the destiny of humans as it is revealed in the bible .
the major issues in christian eschatology are the resurrection of the dead , heaven and hell , millennialism , the last judgment , the new heavens and new earth .
christians believe that the second coming of christ will occur at the end of time , after a period of severe persecutionfullyened the great tribulationants will occur .
all who have died will be resurrected bodily from the dead for the last judgment .
jesus will fully establish the kingdom of god in fulfillment of prophecies .
christians believe that human beings will receive judgment and are given either eternal life or eternal damnation .
this includes the judgment at the resurrection of the dead as well as the belief that catholics , orthodox and most protestants protestants would be judged in a judgment particular to the soul upon physical death .
in catholicism , those who die in a state of grace , i . e . without any mortal sin separating them from god , but are still imperfectly purified from the effects of sin .
those who have attained this goal are called saints .
some christians believe that the human soul is not naturally immortal .
many christians also hold to annihilationism , the belief that subsequent to the final judgment , the wicked will end to exist rather than suffer everlasting torment .
jehovah 's witnesses believe that god is the same as the god of justice .
depending on the specific denomination of christianity , practices may include baptism , eucharistitude holy communion , confession , confirmation , burial rites , marriage rites , and the religious education of children .
most denominations have ordained clergy .
so , as justin described , christians assemble for communal worship on sunday , the day of the resurrection , though other liturgical practices often occur outside this setting .
scripture readings are found in the old and new testaments , but especially the gospel accounts .
often these are arranged on an annual cycle , using a book called a lectionary .
instruction is given based on these readings , called a sermon , or homily .
there are many kinds of congregational prayers , including thanksgiving , confession , and intercession .
the lord 's prayer is often prayed .
some groups depart from this traditional liturgical structure .
a division is often made between " high " church services , characterized by greater solemnity and ritual , and " low " services , but even within these two categories , there is great diversity in forms of worship .
seventh-day adventists meet on saturday , while others do not meet on a weekly basis .
charismatic or pentecostal churches may feel led by the holy spirit to action rather than follow a formal order of service , including spontaneous prayer .
they sit quietly until they are moved by the holy spirit to speak .
some evangelical services look like concerts with rock music , dancing and use of multimedia .
for groups which do not recognize a priesthood distinct from ordinary believers , the services are generally led by a minister , preacher , or pastor .
still others may lack any formal leaders , either in principle or by necessity .
some churches use only a cappella music .
nearly all forms of churchmanship celebrate the eucharisttious holy communion plc , which consists of a consecrated meal .
it is reenacted in accordance with jesus ' instruction at the last supper that his followers do in remembrance of him as when he gave his disciples bread , saying , " this is my body " , and gave them wine saying , " this is my blood . "
some churches do not use closed communion .
they offer communion to those who are already united in that denomination .
catholics restrict participation to their members who are not in a state of mortal sin .
most other churches practice open communion , as they view communion as a means to unity , rather than an end , and invite all believing christians to participate .
there are many special events for special events like baptisms or weddings .
in the early church , christians and those yet to complete initiation would separate for the eucharistic part of the worship .
in many churches today , adults and children will separate for all or some of the service to get age-appropriate teaching .
such children 's worship is often called sunday school or sabbath school graduation school graduation schoolchildrene sunday schools are often held before rather than during servicessefling .
in christianity , a sacrament is a rite , instituted by christ , that confers grace , constituting a sacred mystery .
the term is derived from the latin word " sacramentum " , which was used to translate the greek word for " mystery " .
views concerning both sacraments are sacramental , and what it means for an act to be a sacrament .
the most usual definition of a sacrament is that it is an outward sign , instituted by christ , that conveys an inward , spiritual grace through christ .
the two most widely accepted sacraments are baptism and the eucharisteux or holy communion communion communion .
these are the seven sacraments as recognized by churches in the high church tradition .
most other denominations and traditions say that baptism and eucharist are sacraments .
christian denominations , such as baptists , prefer to call them " ordinances " .
in addition to this , the church of the east has two extra sacraments in place of the traditional sacraments of matrimony and the anointing of the sick .
these include holy leavenwyl melkacek and the sign of the cross .
catholics , anglicans , eastern christians , and traditional protestant communities frame worship around the liturgical year .
the liturgical cycle divides the year into seasons , each with their theological emphases , and modes of prayer .
western christians use the same calendars as the cycle of their respective rites .
these days are set aside holy days , such as solemnities which commemorate an event in the life of jesus , mary , or the saints , and periods of fasting , such as lent and other pious events such as memoria , or lesser festivals commemorating saints .
christian groups that do not follow a liturgical tradition often keep certain celebrations , such as christmas , easter , and pentecost .
a few churches do not use a liturgical calendar .
christianity has not generally practiced aniconism , the avoidance or prohibition of devotional images , even if early jewish christians and some modern denominations , invoking the decalogue 's prohibition of idolatry , avoided figures in their symbols .
the cross is one of the most widely recognized symbols .
tertullian , in his book " de corona " , tells how it was already a tradition for christians to trace the sign of the cross on their foreheads .
the crucifix was used in the 5th century .
among the earliest christian symbols , that of the fish or ichthys seems to have ranked first in importance , as seen on monumental sources such as tombs from the first decades of the 2nd century .
its popularity seemingly arose from the greek word " ichthys " , which means " fish " .
other major christian symbols include the chi-rho monogram , the dovetails symbolic of the holy spiritliness , the sacrificial lambidal lambunciation representing christ 's sacrifice .
these all come from the new testament .
baptism is the act of baptism .
beliefs on baptism vary among denominations .
there are many differences on whether the act has any spiritual significance .
some , such as the catholic and eastern orthodox churches , as well as lutherans and anglicans , hold to the doctrine of baptism .
others view baptism as a purely symbolic act , an external public declaration of the inward change which has taken place in the person , but not as spiritually efficacious .
secondly , there are differences of opinion on the methodology of the act .
if immersion is total , by submersion , and by affusion lilith .
those who hold the first view may also adhere to the tradition of infant baptism .
the catholic church also practices infant baptism , usually by affusion , and using the trinitarian formula .
jesus teaches on prayer in the sermon on the mount .
a concern with the techniques of prayer is condemned as " pagan " .
in other places , this same freedom of access to god is also emphasized .
this confident position should be understood in light of christian belief in the unique relationship between the believer and christ through the indwelling of the holy spirit .
in later christian traditions , certain physical gestures are emphasized , including medieval gestures such as genuflection or making the sign of the cross .
kneeling , bowing , and prostration practices are often practiced in more traditional branches of christianity .
in western christianity , the hands are placed palms together and forward as in the feudal commendation ceremony .
at other times the orans posture may be used , with palms up and elbows in .
intercessory is prayer offered for the benefit of other people .
there are many prayers in the bible , including prayers of the apostle peter on behalf of sick persons and by prophets of the old testament in favor of other people .
in the epistle of james , there is no distinction between the intercessory prayer offered by ordinary believers and the prominent old testament prophet elijah .
the effectiveness of prayer in christianity comes from the power of god rather than praying .
the church , in both eastern and western christianity , developed a tradition of asking for intercession of deceased deceased passengers .
in the protestant reformation , the church of england rejected all prayer , largely on the basis of the sole mediatorship of christ .
huldrych zwingli said that he had offered prayers to the saints until his reading of the bible convinced him that this was idolatrous .
the catholic church says that " prayer is the raising of one 's mind and heart to god or the requesting of good things from god . "
the book of common prayer in the anglican tradition is a guide which provides a set order for church services .
like other religions , christians have followers whose beliefs and biblical interpretations vary .
christianity regards the bible canon , the old testament and new testament , as the inspired word of god .
the traditional view of inspiration is that god worked through human authors so that what they produced was what god wished to communicate .
the greek word " theopneustos " means " god-breathed " .
some believe that god gave birth to people inerrant .
others say it is the source of the bible in its original manuscripts .
some people maintain that only a particular translation is inerrant , such as the king james version .
another close view is that the bible is free of error as a guide to salvation .
the books of the bible accepted by the orthodox , catholic , and protestant churches are different somewhat , with jews accepting only the hebrew bible as canonical .
these variations reflect the range of traditions , and of the councils that have convened on the subject .
the bible always includes the books of the bible , the tanakh , and the canon of the bible .
the catholic and orthodox canons , in addition to the tanakh , also include the deuterocanonical books as part of the old testament .
these books appear in the septuagint , but are regarded by protestants to be apocryphal .
they are important documents which help to understand words , grammar , and syntax used in the historical period of their conception .
there are many different versions of the bible , including the apocrypha section between the old testament and the new testament .
the new testament , which was written in koine greek , contains 27 books which are agreed upon by all churches .
there is a great deal of debate on the bible .
the king james version is held to by many because of its striking english prose .
much scholarship in the past several hundred years has gone into comparing different manuscripts in order to reconstruct the original text .
another issue is that several books are considered to be forgeries .
the injunction that women " be silent and submissive " in 1 timothy 2 is thought by many to be a forgery by a follower of paul .
other verses in 1 corinthians , such as 1 corinthians 11 : 2 – 16 where women are instructed to wear a covering over their hair " when they pray or prophesies " , contradict this verse .
a final issue with the bible is the way books were selected for inclusion in the new testament .
other gospels have now been found , such as those found near nag hammadi in 1945 .
the core of the gospel of thomas may have been as early as 50 shillings .
the gospel of thomas contains much that is familiar from the canonical gospels — verse 113 , for example example enoch " the father 's kingdom is spread out upon the earth , but people do not see it " .
scholarship , is currently exploring the relationship in the early church between mystical speculation and experience on the one hand and the search for church order on the other , by analyzing new-found texts , by subjecting canonical texts to further scrutiny , and by an examination of the passage of new testament texts to canonical status .
in antiquity , two schools of exegesis developed in alexandria and antioch .
the alexandrian interpretation , exemplified by origen , tended to read scripture allegorically .
the theology of the catholic church is the literal and spiritual .
the literal sense of understanding scripture is the meaning of scripture .
protestant christians believe that the bible is a self-sufficient revelation , the final authority on all christian doctrine , and revealed all truth necessary for salvation .
this is known as sola scriptura .
protestants believe that ordinary believers may reach an adequate understanding of scripture because scripture itself is clear in its meaning wouldn or perspicuous .
luther believed that without god 's help , scripture would be " enveloped in darkness " .
he was the founder of the bible , and advocated for " one definite and simple understanding of scripture " .
john calvin 's book " all who refuse not to follow the holy spirit as their guide , find in the scripture a clear light " .
the scriptures contain everything that one needs to know in order to get salvation and to live a christian life .
protestants stress the meaning of scripture , the historical-grammatical method .
the historical-grammatical method is a way of writing the text .
the meaning of the text is drawn out through examination of the passage in light of the grammatical and syntactical aspects , the literary genre , as well as theological paces .
the historical-grammatical method is different from the one original meaning and the significance of the text .
the significance of the text is to show how the text is used .
the original passage is seen as having only a single meaning or sense .
milton s . terry said : " a fundamental principle in grammatico-historical exposition is that the words and sentences can have but one and the same connection .
the moment we neglect this principle we drift out upon a sea of uncertainty and conjecture .
technically speaking , the grammatical-historical method of interpretation is different from the determination of the passage 's significance in light of that interpretation .
both define the terminatorially .
some protestant scholars try to use typology .
christianity developed during the first century ad as a jewish sect of second temple judaism .
the pillars of the church are the just , the brother of the lord , saint peter , and john .
according to paul , the arisen christ appeared to james and peter .
jewish christianity soon attracted gentile god-fearers , posing a problem for its jewish religious outlook , which insisted on close observance of the jewish commands .
paul the apostle said that salvation was a faith in christ , and he died and resurrection was not .
at first he persecuted the early christians , but after a conversion experience he preached to the gentiles , and is regarded as having had a big effect on the emerging christian identity as separate from judaism .
this eventually led to the creation of christianity as an independent religion .
this formative period followed by the early bishops , who christians consider the successors of christ 's apostles .
from the year 150 , christian teachers began to produce theological and apologetic works .
the study of these authors is called patristics .
notable early fathers include ignatius of antioch , polycarp , justin martyr , irenaeus , tertullian , clement of alexandria and origen .
some jewish and roman religious authorities were persecution by the new testament .
this was punishment for christians such as stephen and james , son of zebedee .
further widespread persecution of the church occurred under nine subsequent roman emperors , most intensely under decius and diocletian .
christianity spread to the roman empire and to the inland parts of the roman empire .
christianity began in the middle of the first century in egypt and by the end of the 2nd century in the region around carthage .
some later churches claim this as their own legacy , including the coptic orthodox church of alexandria .
important africans who influenced the early development of christianity include tertullian , clement of alexandria , origen of alexandria , cyprian , athanasius , and augustine of hippo .
by 201 or earlier , osroene became the first christian state .
king trdat iv made christianity the state religion in armenia between 301 and 314 .
it was not a new religion in armenia .
under emperor constantine , the edict of toleration was approved in 311 .
christianity was a minority belief , with about five percent of the roman population .
constantine 's nephew julian unsuccessfully tried to suppress christianity .
theodosius i , gratian , and valentinian ii started the nicene christianity as the state church of the roman empire .
as soon as it became connected to the state , christianity grew wealthy .
constantine was also instrumental in the convocation of the first council of nicaea in 325 , which sought to address arianism and formulated the nicene creed , which is still used by the catholic church , eastern orthodoxy , anglican communion , and many protestant churches .
nicaea was the first ecumenical councils , which defined critical elements of the theology of the church , notably concerning christology .
the church of the east did not accept the third ecumenical councils .
the byzantine empire was one of the peaks in christian history and christian civilization .
there was a renewed interest in classical greek philosophy , as well as an increase in literary output in vernacular greek .
byzantine art and literature had a big effect in europe .
later , islam in north africa reduced the size and numbers of christian congregations .
with the fall of the roman empire in the west , the papacy became a political player .
the church also entered into a long period of missionary activity and expansion among the various tribes .
this would later become catholicism spread among the hungarians , the germanic , the baltic and some slavic peoples .
around 500 , st . benedict set out his monastic rule , establishing a system of rules for the foundation and running of monasteries .
monasticism became a powerful force throughout europe , and gave rise to many early centers of learning , most famously in ireland , scotland , and gaul .
in the 7th century , muslims conquered syria fragments including jerusalemcastle , north africa , and spain .
part of the muslims ' success was due to the exhaustion of the byzantine empire in its decades long conflict with persia .
the papacy began in the 8th century , when carolingian leaders became the leader of the frankish kingdom .
the middle ages changed a lot in the church .
gregory the great dramatically improved the structure and administration .
in the early 8th century , iconoclasm became a divisive issue , when it was sponsored by the byzantine emperors .
the second ecumenical council of nicaeaaeaaea¦ 787ensburg finally pronounced in favor of icons .
in the early 10th century , western christian monasticism was further rejuvenated through the leadership of the monastery of cluny .
in the west , from the 11th century onward , some older cathedral schools became universities .
before , higher education had been the domain of christian cathedral schools or monastic schools .
evidence of such schools dates back to the 6th century ad .
these new universities expanded the curriculum to include academic programs for clerics , lawyers , civil servants , and physicians .
it was the direct ancestor of modern institutions of learning .
the university is generally regarded as an institution that has its origin in the medieval christian setting .
mendicant orders were founded in europe , bringing the consecrated religious life out of the monastery and into the new urban setting .
the two main mendicant movements were the franciscans and the dominicans .
both orders made important contributions to the development of the great universities of europe .
another new order was the cistercians .
in this period , church building and ecclesiastical architecture reached new heights .
from 1095 under the pontificate of urban ii , the crusades were launched .
these were a series of military campaigns in the holy land and elsewhere .
the crusades ultimately failed to stifle islamic aggression .
the christian church experienced internal conflict between the 7th and 13th centuries that resulted in a schism between the so-called latin or western christian branchhesis the catholic churchnesia , and an eastern , largely greek , branchhesis the eastern orthodox church .
the two sides disagreed on a number of administrative , liturgical and doctrinal issues , most notably papal primacy of jurisdiction .
the second council of lyon aarhus 1274 protested , and the council of florence dq , attempted to reunite the churches , but in both cases the eastern orthodox refused to implement the decisions , and the two principal churches remain in schism to the present day .
however , the catholic church has achieved union with many smaller eastern churches .
in the thirteenth century , a new emphasis on jesus ' suffering , exemplified by the franciscans ' preaching , caused by turning worshippers ' attention towards jews , on whom christians had placed the blame for jesus ' death .
augustine of hippo , augustine of hippo , said that jews should not be allowed to enjoy the citizenship that christians took for granted .
the aim of the inquisition was to suppress heresy and securing religious and doctrinal unity within christianity .
the 15th century renaissance was about the time of getting more interest in ancient and classical learning .
during the reformation , martin luther posted the " ninety-five theses " 1517 against the sale of indulgences .
soon , printed copies were spread across europe .
in 1521 , the edict of worms condemned and excommunicated luther and his followers .
other reformers like zwingli , oecolampadius , calvin , knox , and arminius also criticized catholic teaching and worship .
these challenges became the movement called protestantism , which said that the pope was the main idea , the role of tradition , the seven sacraments , and other doctrines and practices .
in the reformation , henry viii had made england the head of the church of england .
from 1536 , the monasteries in england , wales and ireland were dissolved .
thomas muntzer , andreas karlstadt and andreas karlstadt were seen as corrupted .
their activity brought about the radical reformation , which gave birth to various anabaptist groups .
partly in response to the protestant reformation , the catholic church was a major change .
the council of trent clarified and reasserted catholic doctrine .
during the following centuries , the european and the european countries fought in the european wars .
the discovery of the continent was by christopher columbus in 1492 .
christianity spread to the americas , oceania , east asia and sub-saharan africa .
in europe , the division caused by the reformation led to outbreaks of religious violence and the establishment of separate state churches in europe .
lutheranism spread into the northern , central , and eastern parts of germany , livonia , and scandinavia .
the religion of england was started in 1534 .
calvinism began to be used in scotland , the netherlands , hungary , switzerland , and france .
arminianism gained popularity in the netherlands and frisia .
these differences led to the outbreak of conflicts in which religion played a key factor .
the thirty years ' war , the english civil war , and the french wars of religion are an example .
these events made the christian debate about persecution and toleration .
in the era known as the great divergence , when in the west , the age of enlightenment and the scientific revolution brought about great societal changes , christianity was confronted with various forms of skepticism and with certain modern political ideologies , such as versions of socialism and liberalism .
events ranged from mere anti-clericalism to violent outbursts against christianity , such as the dechristianization of france during the french revolution , the spanish civil war , and certain marxist movements , especially the russian revolution and the persecution of christians in the soviet union under state atheism .
the making of the colonies was the start of the countries that were part of the napoleonic era .
in all european countries , different denominations found themselves in competition to greater or lesser extents with each other and with the state .
variables were the relative sizes of the denominations and the religious , political , and ideological orientation of the states .
urs altermatt of the university of fribourg , looking for catholicism in europe , identifies four models for the european nations .
in some countries , such as belgium , spain , and austria , religious and national communities are more or less identical .
symbiosis and separation are common in poland , the republic of ireland , and switzerland , all countries with competing denominations .
competition is found in germany , the netherlands , and switzerland , all countries with minority catholic populations .
finally , the separation between religionnier and the state is found in france and italy .
the combined factors of the formation of nation states and ultramontanism , especially in germany and the netherlands , but also in england to a much lesser extent , often forced catholic churches , organizations , and believers to choose between the national demands of the state and the authority of the church , specifically the pope .
in germany , liberals and protestants under the leadership of bismarck managed to restrict catholic expression and organization .
christian commitment in europe dropped as modernity and secularism came into their own , particularly in the czech republic and estonia , while religious commitments in america have been high in comparison to europe .
the west is no longer the most important standard bearer of christianity .
about 7 to 10 % of arabs are christians .
christianity is the world 's largest religion .
christians share the world 's population at around 33 % for the last 100 years .
this also caused a lot of christianity to change in the demographics of christianity .
christians are the largest religion in the world , and by 2050 , the christian population is expected to be more than 3 billion .
as a percentage of christians , the catholic church and orthodoxy are declining in parts of the world .
popular protestantism is the fastest growing religious categories in the world .
nevertheless , catholicism will continue to grow to 1.63 billion by 2050 , according to todd johnson of the center for the study of global christianity .
africa alone , by 2015 , will be home to 230 million african catholics .
if the u . n . projects that africa 's population will reach 4.5 billion by 2100neo not 2 billion in 2004 aberdeen , catholicism will indeed grow , as other religious groups .
christianity is the main religion in europe , the americas , and southern africa .
in asia , it is the main religion in georgia , armenia , east timor , and the philippines .
however , it is declining in many areas including the northern and western united states , oceaniarton and new zealand twain .
the christian population is not decreasing in brazil , the southern united states , and the province of alberta , canada .
in some countries , like australia and new zealand , the population is declining .
christianity is the main religion in the western world .
a 2011 pew research center survey found that 76 % of europeans , 73 % in oceania and about 86 % in latin america and 77 % in north america identified themselves as christians .
by 2010 , there were 157 countries and territories in the world .
there are many charismatic movements that have become well established over large parts of the world , especially africa , latin america , and asia .
protestantism has spread rapidly in africa , asia , oceania , and latin america .
from 1960 to 2000 , the global growth of the number of evangelical protestants grew three times the world 's population rate , and twice that of islam .
a study conducted by st . mary 's university estimated about 10.2 million muslim converts to christianity in 2015 .
the results also state that significant numbers of muslims converts to christianity in afghanistan , albania , azerbaijan , algeria , france , germany , france , germany , indonesia , malaysia , morocco , the netherlands , saudi arabia , tunisia , turkey , kyrgyzstan , the united states , and central asia .
christianity is also reported that christianity is popular among people of different backgrounds in india .
in most countries in the developed world , people who continue to identify themselves as christians have been falling over the last few decades .
some believe this simply as part of a drift away from traditional membership institutions , while others link it to signs of a decline in belief in the importance of religion in general .
europe 's christian population , though in decline , still constitutes the largest geographical component of the religion .
according to data from the 2012 european social survey , around a third of european christians say they attend services once a month or more , conversely about more than two-thirds of latin american christians .
christianity is the only state religion of the following nations : argentinattered catholic ¥ , tuvaluvialeria , tongattered methodist wylie lutheranism , norway foley , the kingdom of denmarkkhkhkhkhkhil , the kingdom of denmark ; england ; and the kingdom of denmark ; and the kingdom of denmark ; and the kingdom of denmark ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ;
there are many other countries , such as cyprus , which do not have an established church , but still give official recognition and support to a specific christian denomination .
