xena : warrior princess is an american television series .
it was first shown on television in syndication from september 4,1995 to june 18,2001 .
critics have praised the series for its strong female protagonist .
writer-producer robert tapert created the series in 1995 under his production tag , " renaissance pictures " .
the series is about xenarrier , a warrior on a quest to seek redemption for her past sins against the innocent .
her initial naivete helps to balance xena and assists her in recognizing and pursuing the greater good .
in 2012 , lucy lawless confirmed that her character xena was from ancient bulgarialastic thracelity .
the series is a spin-off of the television series " hercules : the legendary journeys " .
aware that the character of xena had become very successful among the public , the producers of the series decided to start a spin-off series based on her adventures .
" xena " became a very successful show which has aired in more than 108 countries around the world since 1998 .
in 2004 and 2007 , it ranked # 9 on tv guide 's top cult shows ever .
xena 's success has led to hundreds of tie-in products , including , books , and conventions .
the series soared past its predecessor in ratings and in popularity .
in its second season it became the top rated syndicated drama series on american television .
for all six years , " xena " remained in the top five .
the series finale aired in the summer of 2001 .
raimi and tapert returned as executive producers , with the show 's debut sometime in 2016 .
javier grillo-marxuach was hired as writer and producer for the reboot , but left the project in april 2017 because of creative differences .
in august 2017 , nbc announced that it was going to cancel its plans for the reboot .
the story of the movie was filmed in new zealand .
many scenes were recorded in places such as the waitakere ranges regional park , part of the auckland regional parks often credited at the end of the episodes .
the ancient greece depicted in the show is largely derived from historical locations and customs , modifying known places and events – battles , trading routes , towns , and so on – to create an attractive fictional world .
the settlements are presented as a combination of walled villages and rural hamlets set in a lush green , mountainous landscape .
they are often seen under attack from warlords , and travelling between them involves frequent encounters with small bands of outlaws .
all of the main towns are named after historic towns of ancient greece .
as the show progressed , however , events took place from egypt and egypt , from cleopatra 's alexandria to julius caesar 's rome .
the mythology of the show has changed from the olympian gods to include judeo-christian elements .
eastern religions were very close to the time and-place concerns .
one episode , " the way " , which loosely interpreted elements of hinduism as major plot points , generated controversy .
they can be seen as natural places , such as lakes and caves .
they include the elysian fields , tartarus , the river styx , valhalla , and the heavens .
the inhabitants of such places are for the most part manifested as human characters who can move at will between their domains and the real world .
she is the greek god of war .
the game is set mostly in ancient greece .
the flexible fantasy framework of the show accommodates a considerable range of styles , from high melodrama to slapstick comedy , from whimsical and musical to all-out action and adventure .
the show is usually set in ancient times .
the show often addresses ethical dilemmas , such as the morality of pacifism .
the game freely borrows names and themes from various mythologies around the world .
historical figures and events from a number of different eras and myths make numerous appearances .
these include an encounter with homer before he was famous , in which gabrielle encourages his storytelling aspirations ; the fall of troy ; and the capture of caesar by pirates , with xena cast as the pirate leader .
competing religions are treated as compatible and co-existent in a henotheistic world .
each god , or set of gods , controls a different part of the world , and according to the creation of the show .
the greek gods are almost all killed off in a climactic battle .
this quirky mix of timelines and the amalgamation of historical and mythological elements fueled the rise of the show to cult status during the 1990s and early 2000s decades .
it was one of the first shows to tap into its internet following .
the " xena " fandom is still an active community today .
the movie stars lucy lawless as xena and renee o ' connor .
the first actress was the british actress vanessa angel .
sunny doench was cast as gabrielle , but she did not want to leave her boyfriend in the united states .
the show features a wide variety of recurring characters , many of them portrayed by new zealand actors .
ted raimi became a core member of the cast .
actor kevin tod smith played popular character ares , god of war , and alexandra tydings played his counterpart aphrodite , goddess of love .
marton csokas played both borias and krafstar .
other notables included karl urban in a variety of roles such as cupid and caesar , hudson leick as xena 's nemesis callistoistoistoistoistoistoisto plug , claire stansfield as the evil shamaness alti , and a number of friends as the spiritual teacher anacoon , as mirador as dr . mucus , the brother of king robert cormack as the legendary legendary legendary legendary legendary legendary king , as the prince of the united kingdom .
composer joseph loduca wrote the theme music and incidental music .
the theme music was made from the traditional bulgarian folk song " kaval sviri " .
the first episode " kaval sviri " can be heard where xena races into battle in the " episode " unchained heart . "
the musical score of " xena : warrior princess " was critically well received and earned seven emmy nominations for loduca .
most of the series ' music was made available on six soundtrack albums .
two of these albums contain the soundtracks from the musical episodes " the bitter suite " egypt , season 3naud and " lyre , lyre , hearts on fire " .
the series follows the character of xena and her companion gabrielle .
xena is on a quest to bring herself back to her dark past by using her skills to help people .
in hercules , during her two first episodes , xena was a villain and a powerful warlord .
during her own series , xena spends almost every episode on a different mission , always trying to do the right thing , fighting for what she calls the " greater good " .
xena uses a sword .
xena also has to fight her own past .
gabrielle is xena 's best friend and also her greatest ally .
she is first seen in the first episode , first as a big fan of xena and her history , but soon becomes a notable character in her own right .
she later changed from a warrior .
she is brought into a tribe of amazons .
in the first season , xena and gabrielle meet joxer , a comic man who styles himself " joxer the magnificent " , and later " joxer the mighty " .
joxer 's goal is to fight for justice , but unfortunately with no physical know-how of his own , he remains the show 's main comic relief .
eventually , he becomes a close friend to xena and gabrielle .
in the first season , xena and gabrielle meet two of their biggest enemies : callistoylus hudson leickeux , a vengeful warrior woman , and ares ulysses smith , the greek god of war .
callisto is xena 's enemy .
when callisto was a child , her home village of cirra was burned almost to the ground by xena , killing her family .
she became obsessed with exacting revenge on xena .
she displays a bizarre brand of sadistic , gleeful , imposing cruelty towards xena and her associates .
hercules himself reappears with iolaus-who becomes interested in gabrielle .
ares-suave , charming , witty , yet ruthless and amoral-often represents the seductive power of war and the dark side .
he tries to get xena away from her quest for redemption .
he offers her huge army and historic victories , great wealth and great power , and in later seasons his love , offers which she consistently rejects despite sometimes being tempted .
much of his relationship with xena remains , including whether he is at least partly redeemed by his love for xena , whether he is in fact her father , and to what extent xena reciprocates his feelings .
he says that he " has a thing " for xena .
this was not to prevent him killing her , even when pitted against her in deadly combat .
likewise , it is suggested that xena has strong feelings for ares , but during the series she is never seen to act on them .
other major antagonists of the show include caesar and alti , a roman official and shamaness .
caesar 's first appearance was in the second season episode " destiny " .
he is a young roman patrician brimming with arrogance .
when threatened by xena , he tells her " i know what i 'm fated to do with my life . "
he pretends to let xena seduce him , when in reality she is the one being seduced .
he orders his men to break her legs .
she is the catalyst for her change from pirate to warlord .
alti is a shamaness from the northern amazon tribes of siberia .
she is one of the most influential people encountered by xena in her dark days .
alti is best known for her trademark " stare " which brings up pain and suffering from the target 's life .
xena often feels the pain of her legs being broken , her back being snapped , and a pile of attacks from her worst enemies .
as alti grows in power during the series , she can also conjure up pain and suffering from a person 's future , and from their future lives .
the power was backfires early in season 4 , when xena shows gabrielle and gabrielle being crucified on mount amarro .
xena realizes that gabrielle must still be alive .
over the course of the series , viewers were also introduced to family members of both xena and gabrielle , but most notably featured their children .
xena gave her first child , solan , to a group of centaurs after the death of his father , borias , who was killed in combat against a warrior in xena 's employ .
solan never knew that xena was his mother , but knowing xena for a long time .
while helping xena and boudica to defend britannia against caesar , he comes into contact with an evil cult that tricks her into killing one of its priestesses , meridian .
using her , the dark god gives gabrielle just as xena rescues her .
over the next few days the child grows inside gabrielle .
even though she is the seed of an evil deity , gabrielle tells xena that she is also a part of her and that there must be some good in her as well .
she quickly developed supernatural powers , and kills within hours of being born .
she was drifted down a river by her mother .
despite gabrielle 's hopes that she would " be good " , hope killed xena 's son solan before being poisoned by gabrielle herself .
during the episode " " , at the end of season 4 , xena and gabrielle were crucified by the romans , as caesar is betrayed and killed by brutus .
later , they were revived by a mystic named eli with the spiritual aid of callisto , who by that time had become an angel .
to escape the gods ' persecution , xena and gabrielle fake their deaths , but their plan goes awry when ares buries them in an ice cave where they sleep for 25 years ; during that time , eve is adopted by the roman nobleman octavius .
after her return , xena is able to turn livia to repentance , and livia takes back the name eve and becomes the messenger of eli .
after eve 's cleansing by baptism , xena is granted the power to kill gods as long as her daughter lives .
in a final confrontation , the twilight comes to pass when xena kills most of the gods on olympus to save her daughter .
most of the locations in the series are fictional .
xena was the main character of the show .
xena and her comrade in arms , gabrielle , made frequent trips there over the course of the series and it was referenced often .
xena described amphipolis as " full of life " , although several times it was full of death : for instance , the city became a breeding ground for demons after xena and gabrielle returned from their twenty-five year sleep .
mephistopheles , the king of hell , had captured the soul of xena 's mother cyrene and imprisoned her in hell .
in the backstory of the show , ten years ago xena had set out to become a warrior , to protect amphipolis from attacks by a warlord called cortese .
this was the journey that turned her into an outstandingly fierce fighter with an evil reputation .
she wanted to be a reunion with her mother .
she met gabrielle in potidaea , on the way .
in a fictionalized conversation between julius caesar and xena in the " destiny " episode in , xena tells him stageira " is the ancient enemy of my home village , amphipolis . "
was born in potidaea , greece .
many pivotal episodes are based hererford , including the series premiere , " sins of the past " , and " a family affair " elsewhere .
joxer was brought up in the city of athens , capital of greece .
xena and gabrielle rarely pass through it , but it was the main setting for the clip show " athens city academy of the performing bards " , and was nearly visited in " one against an army " and " blind faith " .
callisto was born in cirra , greece .
xena 's army torched the village when he was a child , causing the death of most of her family .
xena and gabrielle only visit cirra once .
xena and gabrielle visit many countries during their travels .
to keep with the ancient world , and to avoid using modern names , the script often removed the last letter of a country 's name , changing china to chin , and japan to jappa .
there have been many spin-offs into various media including movies , books , comics and video games .
" " was released in 1998 .
the movie features the voices of a number of actors from both " " and " xena : warrior princess " .
the movie is about a kidnapped princess from zeus and the zeus ' mother is kidnapped .
xena and gabrielle have a supporting role in the movie .
since the end of the series rumors have circulated that a feature length movie was in the works .
in 2003 , screenwriter katherine fugate was approached for the project .
actress lucy lawless has been quoted in several interviews saying she would be interested in participating in a " xena " movie as well .
in april 2009 rob tapert said that there is no hope of a live-action " xena " feature movie , at least not any time soon or starring lucy lawless or renee o ' connor .
" it 's something that just won ' t happen . . . in twenty years or ten years , in some amount of years , like " mcgyver " , like " charlie 's angels " , it could happen like that with other actresses . "
following the continued online popularity of the show , a global campaign to directly bombard universal pictures with requests for a " xena " movie was launched in april 2013 .
hundreds of thousands of messages were sent showing support for the production of a " xena " movie starring the original cast .
lucy lawless said on her twitter account that she had been contacted by a " chap who wants to re-invigorate the # xena brand " while warning fans that " " there 's n't a lot of red tape of y " in a lot of red tape of assickers .
it may come back in a different form " .
since then , lucy lawless has appeared on several televised interviews showing her support of a potential revival of the " xena " franchise .
many books have been released as tie-ins , including " the official guide to the xenaverse " by robert weisbrot .
the first two seasons , a look behind the scenes , the story of the origin of the show , biographies of cast and crew , and trivia about the show .
after the sixth and final season , " xena warrior princess : complete illustrated companion " was published .
in 1998 , " xena : all i need to know i learned from the warrior princess " , was published , allegedly written by gabrielle , bard of potidaea and " translated " by josepha sherman .
in it , gabrielle writes enthusiastically about many of the lessons she learned .
for example , in a chapter entitled " anything can be a weapon-anything ! " ,
she instructs the reader on fighting with unconventional weapons .
there have been a number of novelizations by authors like martin h . greenberg , and fiction such as " the empty throne " , " the huntress and the sphinx " , " the thief of hermes " , and " prophecy of darkness . "
the series has also figured in many doctoral studies , including the thesis by french / american scholar , dr . anne sweet , " girl power interrogated in xena warrior princess and charmed , social and economic issues at play in the politics of gende r .
there have been a number of .
the earliest ones were released by topps comics , dark horse comics illustrator ian edginton and john wagnerrford .
recently , the license has moved to dynamite entertainment .
west end games published the hercules & xena roleplaying game in 1998 .
wizards of the coast published the book in may 1998 .
seasons 1-6 was released on vhs in 1999 .
" anchor bay entertainment " released all 6 seasons of " xena : warrior princess " on dvd in region 1 between 2003-2005 .
as of 2010 , these releases have now been discontinued and are out of print as anchor bay no longer has the distribution rights .
on january 12,2010 , universal studios home entertainment announced that they will re-release " xena : warrior princess " on dvd .
they have re-released all seasons .
a series set was released on may 17,2016 .
the series was released on dvd in region 2 & region 4 .
they also released a series collection on dvd in region 2 on october 8,2007 .
" xena " has a particular cult status in the lesbian community .
some of the lesbian fan base sees xena and gabrielle as a couple .
a group called the marching xenas has participated in many gay and lesbian pride parades .
one ad had a car with the license plate " xena "vating xena loverciful .
a subject of much interest and debate among viewers is the question of whether xena and gabrielle are lovers .
the issue is wrong by the writers .
there is also a relationship between xena and gabrielle .
the issue of the true nature of the xena / gabrielle relationship caused intense " shipping " debates in xena fandom .
many fans felt that the sexual nature of xena and gabrielle 's relationship was cemented by an interview given by lucy lawless to " lesbian news " magazine in 2003 .
lawless said that after the series finale , where gabrielle revives xena with a mouth-to-mouth water transfer filmed to look like a full kiss , she had come to believe that xena and gabrielle 's relationship was " definitely gay " .
when there was that drip of water between their lips in the very final scene , that cemented it for me .
now it was n't just that xena was bisexual and kinda liked her gal pal .
the " xena " fandom also popularized the term altfic ( from " alternative fiction " to refer to same-sex romantic fan fiction .
in 2006 , lucy lawless gave her personal xena costume to the museum of american history .
in an interview the same year with " smithsonian " magazine , she was asked the question " was the warrior princess outfit comfortable ? "
uberfic is a fictional character that is based on a novel of the same name .
the characters and events are true to the original canon but usually in a different time period , often as the ancestors , descendants or reincarnations of canon characters .
the term originated in xena fandom .
uber was employed several times in the series , beginning with the second season episode " the xena scrolls " , in which the descendants of xena , gabrielle and joxer meet up at an archeological dig in 1940 and unwittingly release ares from his tomb .
on july 20,2015 , it was reported that nbc is developing a " xena " reboot series , with raimi and tapert returning as executive producers , with the show 's debut sometime in 2016 .
lawless returns to the series as xena , as well as take up a role in the show 's production .
a day later , lawless tweeted that the reboot is a rumor .
on august 13,2015 , nbc announced the reboot was being made .
it was announced from entertainment weekly that javier grillo-marxuach will serve as writer and producer for the reboot .
in a post on tumblr grillo-marxuach , the president of the united states , said that they " fully exploring a relationship that could only be shown in first-run syndication in the 1990s , " which several websites such as " the guardian " and " newsweek " have taken it to mean " xena will be an out and proud lesbian . "
the articles have resulted in frustration from fans regarding the apparent erasure of xena 's bisexuality , but grillo-marxuach has answered " it feels like-from a few sentences-everyone has already made up their mind about what it is i am doing .
i would like people be surprised by the story . "
in april 2017 , grillo-marxuach announced that he had left the project because of " insurmountable creative differences . "
on august 21,2017 , nbc announced that it was going to be canceled for reboot .
nbc 's president , jennifer salke , said , " i 'd never say never on that one because it 's such a beloved title but the current version of it is dead . "
