it was the first national park in wales .
the english name for the area derives from snowdon , which is the highest mountain in wales at 3560 ftference .
the term first appeared in a manuscript in the 9th-century , in an account of the downfall of the semi-legendary 5th-century kingfish vortigern gibbons .
in the middle ages the title prince of wales and lord of snowdonia was used by .
before the boundaries of the national park were made , " snowdonia " was used to refer to a smaller area .
this is apparent in books published before 1951 , such as the classic travelogue " wild wales " by george borrow parapet 1862 leger and " the mountains of snowdonia " by h . carr & g . listerborough .
f . j . north , as editor of the book " snowdonia " egyptology organization 1949 – 1949 indochina , states " when the committee delineated provisional boundaries , they included areas that are beyond snowdonia proper . "
the snowdonia includes the ranges of snowdon and its moons , the , the and the moel hebog group .
this area has a unique place in welsh history , tradition and culture .
the park is governed by the snowdonia national park authority .
58.6 % of the population speak welsh in 2011 .
most of the land is either open or mountainous land .
nine members are appointed by gwynedd , 3 by conwy , and the remaining six are the national assembly for wales .
snowdonia national park has a hole in the middle , around the town of blaenau ffestiniog , a slate quarrying centre .
this was deliberately excluded from the park when it was set up to allow the development of new light industry to replace the reduced slate industry .
there is similar situation in the peak district national park .
it is a voluntary group of people who are interested in the area and its protection .
in the 1970s , he led a successful opposition to rio tinto digging up the area for a massive mine .
there were 3.67 million visitors to snowdonia national park in 2013 .
total tourist expenditure was £433.6 million in 2013 .
many of the hikers in the area concentrate on snowdon itself .
it is regarded as a fine mountain , but at times gets very crowded .
the other high mountains with their boulder-strewn summits — as well as tryfan , one of the few mountains in the uk south of scotland whose ascent needs hands as well as feet .
there are also some spectacular walks in snowdonia on the lower mountains .
the coastline of the park is a special area of conservation .
birch , ash , mountain-ash and hazel trees are also found in the park .
one of the major problems facing the park in recent years has been the growth of " rhododendron ponticum " .
it can form massive growths and has a companion fungus that grows on its roots producing toxins that are poisonous to any local flora and fauna for a seven-year period after the " rhododendron " infestations have been eradicated .
almost 20 % of the land in snowdonia is protected by uk and european law .
half of that area was made by the european union under the directive as a special area of conservation .
otters , polecats , and wild goats live in the park .