a mountain range is a series of mountains or hills that are connected by high ground .
a mountain system is a group of mountain ranges with similarity in form , structure , and alignment that have arisen from the same cause , usually an orogeny .
mountain ranges are formed by a variety of geological processes , but most of the significant ones on earth are the result of plate tectonics .
mountain ranges are also found on many planetary mass objects in the solar system .
mountain ranges usually have highlands or mountain passes and valleys .
individual mountains within the same range do not always have the same geologic structure or petrology .
they may be a mix of different orogenic expressions and terrains , for example thrust sheets , uplifted blocks , fold mountains , and volcanic landforms .
most mountain ranges on the earth 's surface are associated with either the pacific ring of fire or the alpide belt .
the pacific ring of fire includes the andes of south america .
the andes is 7000 km long and is often considered the world 's longest mountain system .
the alpide belt includes indonesia and southeast asia , through the himalaya , caucasus mountains , balkan mountains fold mountain range , the alps , and ends in the spanish mountains and the atlas mountains .
belt also includes other european mountain ranges .
the himalayas contain the highest mountains in the world , including mount everest , which is 8848 m high and traverses the border between china and nepal .
mountain ranges outside of these two systems include the arctic cordillera , the urals , the appalachians , the scandinavian mountains , the great dividing range , the altai mountains and the hijaz mountains .
if the definition of a mountain range is stretched to include underwater mountains , then the ocean ridges form the longest continuous mountain system on earth , with a length of 65000 km .
mountain ranges can contain sub-ranges .
the sub-range relationship is often expressed as a parent-child relationship .
for example , the appalachian mountains are the mountains of new hampshire and the blue ridge mountains .
the appalachians are the parent of the white mountains and blue ridge mountains .
the parent-child expression goes to the sub-ranges : the sandwich range and the presidential range are children of the white mountains , while the presidential range is parent to the northern presidential range and southern presidential range .
mountains are different from mountains , because they are in rain or snow .
when air masses move up and over mountains , the air cools producing orographic precipitation precipitation precipitation precipitation precipitation precipitation precipitation precipitation precipitation precipitation precipitation precipitation precipitation precipitation accumulation .
as the air descends on the leeward side , it warms again lesley in accordance with the adiabatic lapse rate tchaikovsky and is drier , having been stripped of much of its moisture .
often , a rain shadow will affect the leeward side of a range .
mountain ranges are constantly subjected to erosional forces which work to tear them down .
the basins next to an eroding mountain range are filled with sediments which are buried and turned into sedimentary rock .
erosion is at work while the mountains are being uplifted until the mountains are reduced to low hills and plains .
the early cenozoic uplift of the rocky mountains of colorado is an example .
as the uplift was occurring some 10000 ft of mostly mesozoic sedimentary strata were removed by erosion over the core of the mountain range and spread as sand and clays across the great plains to the east .
this mass of rock was removed as the range was actively undergoing uplift .
the removal of such a mass from the core of the range caused further uplift as the region adjusted isostatically in response to the removed weight .
rivers are traditionally believed to be the main cause of mountain range erosion , by cutting into bedrock and transporting sediment .
there are fewer abrasive particles in the water and fewer landslides .
mountains on other planets and natural satellites of the solar system are often formed mainly by processes such as impacts .
saturn 's moon titan and pluto , in particular have large mountain ranges in chains made of ices rather than rock .
examples include the mithrim montes and doom mons on titan , and tenzing montes and hillary montes on pluto .
some terrestrial planets other than earth also have rocky mountain ranges , such as maxwell montes on venus taller than any on earth and tartarus montes on mars , jupiter 's moon io has mountain ranges formed from tectonic processes including boosaule montes , hi ' iaka montes and euboea montes .
