A saint is a person who is recognized as having an exceptional degree of holiness or likeness or closeness to God.
In Roman Catholic, Eastern Orthodox, Anglican, Oriental Orthodox, and Lutheran doctrine, all of their faithful deceased in Heaven are considered to be saints, but some are considered worthy of greater honor or emulation; official ecclesiastical recognition, and consequently veneration, is given to some saints through the process of canonization in the Catholic Church or glorification in the Eastern Orthodox Church.
While the English word "saint" originated in Christianity, historians of religion now use the appellation "in a more general way to refer to the state of special holiness that many religions attribute to certain people", with the Jewish tzadik, the Islamic walī, the Hindu rishi or Sikh guru, and the Buddhist arhat or bodhisattva also being referred to as saints.
The word ἅγιος appears 229 times in the Greek New Testament, and its English translation 60 times in the corresponding text of the King James Version of the Bible.
The word "sanctus" was originally a technical one in ancient Roman religion, but due to its "globalized" use in Christianity the modern word "saint" in English and its equivalent in Romance languages is now also used as a translation of comparable terms for persons "worthy of veneration for their holiness or sanctity" in other religions.
Many religions also use similar concepts (but different terminology) to venerate persons worthy of some honor.
",
, and responds by saying that in the symbolic infrastructure of some religions, there is the image of a certain extraordinary spiritual king's "miraculous powers", to whom frequently a certain moral presence is attributed.
They exert "powerful attractive influence on followers but touch the inner lives of others in transforming ways as well".
According to the Catholic Church, a "saint" is anyone in Heaven, whether recognized on Earth or not, who form the "great cloud of witnesses" (Hebrews 12:1).
These "may include our own mothers, grandmothers or other loved ones (cf.
The title "Saint" denotes a person who has been formally canonized, that is, officially and authoritatively declared a saint, by the Church as holder of the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and is therefore believed to be in Heaven by the grace of God.
There are many persons that the Church believes to be in Heaven who have not been formally canonized and who are otherwise titled "saints" because of the fame of their holiness.
In his book "Saint of the Day", editor Leonard Foley, OFM says this: the "Saints' surrender to God's love was so generous an approach to the total surrender of Jesus that the Church recognizes them as heroes and heroines worthy to be held up for our inspiration.
On 3 January 993, Pope John XV became the first pope to proclaim a person a "saint" from outside the diocese of Rome: on the petition of the German ruler, he had canonized Bishop Ulrich of Augsburg.
Before that time, the popular "cults", or venerations, of saints had been local and spontaneous and were confirmed by the local bishop.
Pope Benedict VIII later declared the Armenian hermit Symeon to be a saint, but it was not until the pontificate of Pope Innocent III that the Popes reserved to themselves the exclusive authority to canonize saints, so that local bishops needed the confirmation of the Pope.
Walter of Pontoise was the last person in Western Europe to be canonized by an authority other than the Pope: Hugh de Boves, the Archbishop of Rouen, canonized him in 1153.
Thenceforth a decree of Pope Alexander III in 1170 reserved the prerogative of canonization to the Pope, insofar as the Latin Church was concerned.
One source claims that "there are over 10,000 named saints and beatified people from history, the Roman Martyrology and Orthodox sources, but no definitive head count".
The latest revision of this book, edited by the Jesuit Herbert Thurston and the British author Donald Attwater, contains the lives of 2,565 saints.
Monsignor Robert Sarno, an official of the Congregation for the Causes of Saints of the Holy See, expressed that it is impossible to give an exact number of saints.
Although the term "worship" is sometimes used, it is only used with the older English connotation of honoring or respecting ("dulia") a person.
According to the Church, Divine worship is in the strict sense reserved only to God ("latria") and never to the Saints.
Saints are not believed to have power of their own, but only that granted by God.
Relics of saints are respected, or "venerated", similar to the veneration of holy images and icons.
The practice in past centuries of venerating relics of saints with the intention of obtaining healing from God through their intercession is taken from the early Church.
John Henry Cardinal Newman interceded with God to cure him of a physical illness.
The deacon, Jack Sullivan, asserted that after addressing Newman he was cured of spinal stenosis in a matter of hours.
In 2009, a panel of theologians concluded that Sullivan's recovery was the result of his prayer to Newman.
Some of the saints have a special symbol by tradition, e.g., Saint Lawrence, deacon and martyr, is identified by a gridiron because he is believed to have been burned to death on one.
This symbol is found, for instance, in the Canadian heraldry of the office responsible for the St. Lawrence Seaway.
The first stage in this process is an investigation of the candidate's life by an expert.
After this, the official report on the candidate is submitted to the bishop of the pertinent diocese and more study is undertaken.
The information is then sent to the Congregation for the Causes of Saints of the Holy See for evaluation at the universal level of the Church.
Finally, after all of these procedures are complete, the Pope may canonize the candidate as a saint for veneration by the universal Church.
In the Eastern Orthodox Church a saint is defined as anyone who is in Heaven, whether recognized here on earth, or not.
By this definition, Adam and Eve, Moses, the various prophets, except for the angels and archangels are all given the title of "Saint".
Sainthood in the Orthodox Church does not necessarily reflect a moral model, but the communion with God: there are countless examples of people who lived in great sin and became saints by humility and repentance, such as Mary of Egypt, Moses the Ethiopian, and Dysmas, the repentant thief who was crucified.
Therefore, a more complete Eastern Orthodox definition of what a saint is, has to do with the way that saints, through their humility and their love of humankind, saved inside them the entire Church, and loved all people.
This does not, however, make the person a saint; the person already was a saint and the Church ultimately recognized it.
As a general rule only clergy will touch relics in order to move them or carry them in procession, however, in veneration the faithful will kiss the relic to show love and respect toward the saint.
Because the Church shows no true distinction between the living and the dead (the saints are considered to be alive in Heaven), saints are referred to as if they were still alive.
They are believed to be able to intercede for salvation and help mankind either through direct communion with God, or by personal intervention.
The saints are seen as models of holiness to be imitated, and as a 'cloud of witnesses' that strengthen and encourage the believer during his or her spiritual journey .
The veneration of saints is sometimes misunderstood to be worship, in which case it is derisively termed "hagiolatry".
Bicknell, stated that the Anglican view acknowledges that the term "invocation may mean either of two things: the simple request to a saint for his prayers (intercession), 'ora pro nobis,' or a request for some particular benefit.
Anglicans believe that the only effective Mediator between the believer and God the Father, in terms of redemption and salvation, is God the Son, Jesus Christ.
Those who beseech the saints to intercede on their behalf make a distinction between "mediator" and "intercessor", and claim that asking for the prayers of the saints is no different in kind than asking for the prayers of living Christians.
According to the Church of England, a saint is one who is sanctified, as it translates in the Authorised King James Version (1611) 2 Chronicles 6:41 Now therefore arise, O LORD God, into thy resting place, thou, and the ark of thy strength: let thy priests, O LORD God, be clothed with salvation, and let thy saints rejoice in goodness.
However, the church still recognizes and honors specific saints, including some of those recognized by the Catholic Church, but in a qualified way: according to the Augsburg Confession, the term "saint" is used in the manner of the Catholic Church only insofar as to denote a person who received exceptional grace, was sustained by faith, and whose good works are to be an example to any Christian.
Traditional Lutheran belief accounts that prayers "to" the saints are prohibited, as they are not mediators of redemption.
But, Lutherans do believe that saints pray for the Christian Church in general.
Methodists believe that all Christians are "saints", but mainly use the term to refer to biblical figures, Christian leaders, and martyrs of the faith.
Many Methodist churches are named after saints—such as the Twelve Apostles, John Wesley, etc.—although most are named after geographical locations associated with an early circuit or prominent location.
In many Protestant churches, the word "saint" is used more generally to refer to anyone who is a Christian.
This is similar in usage to Paul's numerous references in the New Testament of the Bible.
In this sense, anyone who is within the Body of Christ (i.e., a professing Christian) is a 'saint' because of their relationship with Christ Jesus.
Many Protestants consider intercessory prayers to the saints to be idolatry as an application of divine worship that should be given only to God himself is being given to other believers, dead or alive.
Many Protestant sects also consider the practice to be similar to necromancy as the dead are believed to be awaiting resurrection, unable to do anything for the living saint.
Many emphasize the traditional New Testament meaning of the word, preferring to write "saint" to refer to any believer, in continuity with the doctrine of the priesthood of all believers.
The beliefs within The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Mormons) with regard to saints are similar but not quite the same as the Protestant tradition.
In the New Testament, saints are all those who have entered into the Christian covenant of baptism.
The qualification "latter-day" refers to the doctrine that members are living in the "latter days", before the Second Coming of Christ, and is used to distinguish the members of the church, which considers itself the restoration of the ancient Christian church.
The use of the term "saint" is not exclusive to Christianity.
In many religions, there are people who have been recognized within their tradition as having fulfilled the highest aspirations of religious teaching.
In English, the term saint is often used to translate this idea from many world religions.
Cuban Santería, Haitian Vodou, Trinidad Orisha-Shango, Brazilian Umbanda, Candomblé, and other similar syncretist religions adopted the Catholic saints, or at least the images of the saints, and applied their own spirits/deities to them.
The name "santería" was originally a pejorative term for those whose worship of saints deviated from Catholic norms.
Tibetan Buddhists hold the "tulkus" (reincarnates of deceased eminent practitioners) as living saints on earth.
Hindu saints are those recognized by Hindus as showing a great degree of holiness and sanctity.
There is no formal canonization process in Hinduism, but over time, many men and women have reached the status of saints among their followers and among Hindus in general (unlike in Christianity, Hinduism does not canonize people as saints after death, but they can be accepted as saints during their lifetime).
Some Hindu saints are given god-like status, being seen as incarnations of Vishnu, Shiva, Devi and other aspects of the Divine—this can happen during their lifetimes, or sometimes many years after their deaths.
Islam has had a rich history of veneration of saints (often called "wali", which literally means "Friend of God"), which has declined in some parts of the Islamic world in the twentieth century due to the influence of the various streams of Salafism.
In Sunni Islam, the veneration of saints became a very common form of devotion early on, and saints came to be defined in the eighth-century as a group of "special people chosen by God and endowed with exceptional gifts, such as the ability to work miracles."
The classical Sunni scholars came to recognize and honor these individuals as venerable people who were both "loved by God and developed a close relationship of love to Him."
"Belief in the miracles of saints ("karāmāt al-awliyāʾ") ... became a requirement in Sunni Islam during the classical period," with even medieval critics of the ubiquitous practice of grave visitation like Ibn Taymiyyah emphatically declaring: "The miracles of saints are absolutely true and correct, and acknowledged by all Muslim scholars.
The Quran has pointed to it in different places, and the sayings of the Prophet have mentioned it, and whoever denies the miraculous power of saints are innovators or following innovators."
The vast majority of saints venerated in the classical Sunni world were the Sufis, who were all Sunni mystics who belonged to one of the four orthodox legal schools of Sunni law.
Veneration of saints eventually became one of the most widespread Sunni practices for more than a millennium, before it was opposed in the twentieth century by the Salafi movement, whose various streams regard it as "being both un-Islamic and backwards ... rather than the integral part of Islam which they were for over a millennium."
In a manner similar to the Protestant Reformation, the specific traditional practices which Salafism has tried to curtail in both Sunni and Shia contexts include those of the veneration of saints, visiting their graves, seeking their intercession, and honoring their relics.
As Christopher Taylor has remarked: "Throughout Islamic history a vital dimension of Islamic piety was the veneration of Muslim saints....
due, however to certain strains of thought within the Islamic tradition itself, particularly pronounced in the nineteenth and the twentieth centuries ... some modern day Muslims have either resisted acknowledging the existence of Muslim saints altogether or have viewed their presence and veneration as unacceptable deviations."
The term "Tzadik" ("righteous"), and its associated meanings, developed in rabbinic thought from its Talmudic contrast with "Hasid" ("pious"), to its exploration in ethical literature, and its esoteric spiritualisation in Kabbalah.
In Hasidic Judaism, the institution of the Tzadik assumed central importance, combining former elite mysticism with social movement for the first time.
The term "Sant" is applied in the Sikh and related communities to beings that have attained enlightenment through God realization and spiritual union with God via repeatedly reciting the name of God (Naam Japo).
Sikhs are encouraged to follow the congregation of a Sant (Sadh Sangat) or "The Company of the Holy".