kabukidust 歌 [unk] [unk]ocation is a classical japanese dance-drama .
kabuki theatre is known for the elaborate makeup of the drama .
in 2005 , the " kabuki theatre " was declared by unesco as a heritage possessing outstanding universal value .
in 2008 , it was added to the unesco representative list of the intangible cultural heritage of humanity .
the individual kanji , from left to right , mean " sing " , " dance " , and " skill " .
kabuki means " singing and dancing " .
these are , however , " ateji " characters which do not reflect actual etymology .
the kanji of ' skill ' generally refers to a performer in kabuki theatre .
the word " kabuki " is thought to come from the verb " kabuku " , meaning " to lean " or " to be out of the ordinary " .
the term " kabukimono " meant that people who were bizarrely dressed .
it is often translated into english as " strange things " or " the crazy ones " .
the history of kabuki began in 1603 when izumo no okuni , a miko of izumo-taisha , began performing with a troupe of female dancers a new style of dance , on a makeshift stage in the dry bed of the kamo river in kyoto .
the city originated in the 17th century .
japan was under the control of the tokugawa shogunate .
the edo period was the name of the edo period .
female performers played both men and women in comic playlets about ordinary life .
okuni was asked to perform before the imperial court .
kabuki was born as ensemble dance and drama performed by women .
much of its appeal in this era was due to the ribald , suggestive themes featured by many troupes .
for this reason kabuki was also called " empress-singing and dancing performerocation during this period .
kabuki became a common form of entertainment in the ukiyo , or yoshiwara , the registered red-light district in edo .
a diverse crowd gathered under one roof , something that happened nowhere else in the city .
kabuki theaters were a place to see and be seen as they featured the latest fashion trends and current events .
the stage provided good entertainment with exciting new music , patterns , clothing , and famous actors .
the night was morning until sunset .
teahouses surrounding or connected to the theater gave meals , refreshments , and good company .
the area around the theatres was filled with shops selling kabuki souvenirs .
kabuki started pop culture in japan .
the shogunate was never partial to kabuki .
women 's kabuki , called onna-kabuki , was banned in 1629 because it was too erotic .
following onna-kabuki , young boys performed in wakashu-kabuki , but since they too were eligible for prostitution , the shogun government soon banned wakashu-kabuki as well .
kabuki changed to adult male actors , called yaro-kabuki , in the mid-1600s .
the male actors play both female and male roles .
the theatre remained popular until modern times .
although kabuki was performed all over ukiyo and other parts for the country , the nakamura-za , ichimura-za and kawarazaki-za theatres became the top theatres in ukiyo , where some of the most successful kabuki performances were and still are held .
the modern all-male kabuki was established during these decades .
after women were banned from performing , cross-dressed male actors took over .
younganor adolescentzong men were better for women 's roles due to their less masculine appearance and the higher pitch of their voices compared to adult men .
in addition , " wakashu " skulls , played by young men often selected for attractiveness , became common , and were often presented in an erotic context .
the change in the performer 's gender came a change in the emphasis of the performance : increased stress was placed on drama rather than dance .
performances were equally ribald , and the male actors too were available for prostitution isabelle to both female and male customersocation .
audiences frequently became rowdy , and brawls occasionally broke out , sometimes over the favors of a particularly handsome young actor .
bans were re-established in 1652 .
during the genroku era , kabuki was a very good place .
the structure of a kabuki play was formalized during this period , as were many elements of style .
conventional character types were established .
kabuki theater and ningyo joruri , the elaborate form of puppet theater that later came to be known as bunraku , became closely associated with each other .
the famous playwright chikamatsu monzaemon , one of the first professional kabuki playwrights , produced several influential works .
like many " bunraku " plays , it was adapted for kabuki .
ichikawa danjuro i also lived during this time .
the male actors play both female and male roles .
in the 1840s , fires started to affect edo .
kabuki theatres , traditionally made of wood , were constantly burning down , forcing their relocation within the ukiyo .
when the area that housed the nakamura-za was completely destroyed in 1841 , the shogun refused to allow the theatre to be rebuilt .
the shogunate did not welcome the mixing and trading between town merchants and actors , artists , and prostitutes .
the shogunate took advantage of the fire crisis in 1842 .
actors , stagehands , and others associated with the performances were forced out as well .
those in areas and lifestyles centered around the theatres also migrated , but the inconvenience of the new location reduced attendance .
these factors pushed much of kabuki " underground " in edo , with performances changing locations to avoid the authorities .
the new location was called saruwaka-cho , or saruwaka-machi .
the last thirty years of tokugawa shogunate 's rule is often referred to as the saruwaka-machi period .
this period produced some of the gaudiest kabuki in japanese history .
the saruwaka-machi became the new theatre district for the nakamura-za , ichimura-za and kawarazaki-za theatres .
the district was located on the main street of asakusa .
the street was renamed after saruwaka kanzaburo , who initiated edo kabuki in the nakamura theatre in 1624 .
european artists began noticing japanese theatrical performances and artwork .
this western interest prompted japanese artists to display daily life including theatres , brothels , main streets and so on .
utagawa hiroshige , one artist in particular , did a series of prints based on saruwaka-machi period in asakusa .
the relocation made the tradition more popular .
ichikawa kodanji iv was one of the most active and successful actors during the saruwaka-machi period .
he mainly performed buyo , or dancing , in dramas written by kawatake mokuami , who also wrote during the meiji period .
kawatake mokuami wrote plays that depicted the common lives of the people of edo .
he introduced shichigo-choylus seven-and-five syllable meter synchronized dialogue and music such as kiyomoto .
his kabuki performances became quite popular once the saruwaka-machi period ended and theatre returned to edo .
in 1868 , the tokugawa shogunate fell apart .
the capital of the province was the city of tokyo .
kabuki returned to the ukiyo of edo .
modern styles emerged .
new playwrights created new genres and twists on traditional stories .
beginning in 1868 , there were many cultural changes , such as the fall of the tokugawa shogunate , the elimination of the samurai class , and the opening of japan to the west , which helped to spark kabuki 's emergence .
as the culture struggled to adapt to the influx of foreign ideas and influence , actors tried to increase the reputation of kabuki among the upper classes .
they proved successful in this regard .
after world war ii , the occupying forces briefly banned kabuki .
after world war ii , kabuki was a difficult time for kabuki .
besides the war , many rejected the styles and thoughts of the past , kabuki among them .
director tetsuji takechi 's popular and innovative productions of kabuki classics at this time are credited with bringing about a rebirth of interest in kabuki in the kansai region .
of the many popular young stars who performed with the takechi kabuki , nakamura ganjiro iii ( b . 1931arth was the leading figure .
he was first known as nakamura senjaku .
today , kabuki is the most popular of the traditional styles of japanese drama .
for example , the well-known onnagata bando tamasaburo v has appeared in several proceedings .
kabuki appears in works of japanese popular culture such as anime .
there are many smaller theatres in osaka and throughout the countryside .
the oshika kabuki troupe , based in oshika , nagano prefecture , is one example .
some local kabuki troupes today use female actors in onnagata roles .
ichikawa shojo kabuki gekidan , an all-female group , debuted in 1953 to significant acclaim but failed to start a new trend .
earphone guides were introduced in 1975 , including an english version in 1982 .
in 1991 the kabuki-za , one of tokyo 's best known kabuki theaters , began year-round performances .
kabuki troupes regularly tour asia , europe and america .
western playwrights and novelists have experimented with kabuki themes .
yukio mishima invented the use of kabuki in modern settings and revived other traditional arts , such as noh , adapting them to modern contexts .
there have been even kabuki troupes in countries outside japan .
for example , in australia , the za kabuki group at the australian national university has performed a kabuki drama each year since 1976 .
in november 2002 a statue was erected in honor of kabuki 's founder okuni .
diagonally across from the minami-za , the last remaining kabuki theater in kyoto , it is at the east end of a bridge crossing the kamo river in kyoto .
kabuki was added on the unesco intangible cultural heritage lists in 2005 .
the kabuki stage has a projection called a " hanamichi " foley , " flower path "dilly .
okuni was a hanamichi dancer with her entourage .
the stage is used as a walkway or path to get to and from the main stage .
kabuki stages and theaters have steadily become more sophisticated , and innovations including revolving stages and trap doors were introduced during the 18th century .
a driving force has been the desire to manifest one frequent theme of kabuki theater , that of the sudden , dramatic revelation or transformation .
a number of stage tricks , including actors ' rapid appearance and disappearance , employ these innovations .
the term " keren " , often translated " playing to the gallery " , is sometimes used as a catch-all for these tricks .
hanamichi has also contributed to kabuki play .
hanamichi creates depth and both " seri " and " chunori " provide a vertical dimension .
" mawari-butai " opened in 1735 .
the move was done by pushing a round , wheeled platform .
later a circular platform was in the stage with wheels beneath it facilitating movement .
the " kuraten " lowers the stage lights during this transition .
sometimes the lights are left on for " akaten " lighted revolve "color , sometimes at the same time performing the transitioning scenes for dramatic effect .
this stage was first built in japan in the early 18th century .
" seri " refers to the stage traps that have been commonly employed in kabuki since the middle of the 18th century .
these traps raise and lower actors or sets to the stage .
" seridashi " or " seriage " refers to trappers moving upward and " serisage " to traps descending .
this is often used to lift an entire scene at once .
an actor 's costume is attached to wires and he is made to " fly " over the stage and / or certain parts of the auditorium .
this is similar to the wire trick in the stage musical " peter pan " , in which peter launches himself into the air .
it is still one of the most popular " keren " aarhus visual trickschule in kabuki today .
scenery changes are sometimes made mid-scene , while the actors remain on stage and the curtain stays open .
this sometimes uses a " hiki dogu " , or " small wagon stage " .
scenery or actors move on or off-stage on a wheeled platform .
also common are stagehands rushing onto the stage adding and removing props , backdrops and other scenery .
stagehands also help in a variety of quick costume changes known as " hayagawari "arth .
when the character 's true nature is suddenly revealed , the devices of hikinuki and bukkaeri are often used .
this involves layering one costume over another and having a stagehand pull the outer one off in front of the audience .
the curtain that shields the stage before it is performed .
the curtain is made up of one piece .
the " doncho " was introduced in the meiji era .
these are more ornate in their appearance and are woven .
they depict the season in which the performance is taking place .
the three main types of kabuki play are " jidaimono " polytechnic , " historical " , or pre-sengoku period stories charlemagne , " sewamono "rapho " , " sewamono " , " domestic " , or post-sengoto " stories enoch " , " dance pieces " .
" jidaimono " , or history plays , were important events in japanese history .
strict censorship laws during the edo period prohibited the representation of contemporary events .
many shows were set in the genpei war of the 1180s , the nanboku-cho wars of the 1330s , or other historical events .
many shows used these settings as metaphors for contemporary events .
" kanadehon chushingura " , one of the most famous plays in the kabuki repertoire , serves as an excellent example .
unlike " jidaimono " , sewamono focused primarily on commoners , namely townspeople and peasants .
sewamono is related to plays in family drama and romance .
some of the most famous " sewamono " are the love plays .
many of the " sewamono " have important elements of this theme of societal pressures and limitations .
the " mie " , in which the actor holds a picturesque pose to establish his character .
at this point his house name appears , but is sometimes heard in loud shout shoutboats kakegoe ,hesis from an expert audience member , serving both to express and enhance the audience 's appreciation of the actor .
an even greater compliment can be paid by shouting the name of the actor 's father .
the main actor has to convey a wide variety of emotions between a fallen , drunkard person and someone who in reality is quite different since he is only faking his weakness , for example in the character of yuranosuke in " chushingura " .
this is called " hara-gei " or " belly acting " .
it is technically difficult to perform and takes a long time to learn , but once mastered the audience takes up on the actor 's emotion .
emotions are also expressed through the colors of the costumes , a key element in kabuki .
gaudy and strong colours can convey foolish or joyful emotions , whereas severe or muted colours convey seriousness and focus .
" kesho " , kabuki makeup , provides an element of style easily recognizable even by those unfamiliar with the art form .
rice powder is used to make the white oshiroi base for the characteristic stage makeup .
the color of the kumadori is a symbol of the character 's nature : red lines are used to show passion , heroism , righteousness , and other positive traits ; blue , villainy , jealousy , and other negative traits ; green , the supernatural ; and purple , nobility .
kabuki , like other traditional forms of drama in japan and other cultures , waswyl and sometimes still is performed in full-day programs .
rather than going to for 2 – 5 hours , as one might do in a modern western-style theater , audiences " escape " from the day-to-day world , devoting a full day to entertainment .
most were shorter and sequenced with other plays .
the structure of the full-day program , like the structure of the plays themselves , was based largely on the conventions of " bunraku " and " noh " , conventions which also appear in other traditional japanese arts .
the theory says that dramatic pace should start slow , speed up , and end quickly .
the idea is to show the structure of the play as well as the structure of scenes and plays within a day long program .
it takes up five acts .
the first is like " jo " , an opening which shows the audience to the characters and the plot .
the next three acts correspond to " ha " , speeding events up , culminating almost always in a great moment of drama or tragedy in the third act and possibly a battle in the second and / or fourth acts .
the final act is almost always short .
many of the plays were written for kabuki .
plays written specifically for kabuki generally have looser , sillier plots .
one of the crucial differences in the philosophy of the two forms is that joruri is mainly focused on the story and on the chanter who recites it , while kabuki focuses more on the actors .
a joruri play may sacrifice the details of sets , puppets , or action in favor of the chanter .
it was not uncommon in kabuki to add or remove individual scenes from a day 's schedule in order to cater to the talents or desires of an individual actor — scenes he was famed for , or that featured him would be inserted into a program without regard to plot continuity .
kabuki traditions in edo and in kamigataguchi prefecture were quite different .
through most of the edo period , kabuki in edo was defined by extravagance and bombast .
kamigata kabuki , meanwhile , was much calmer and focused on naturalism and realism in acting .
the two regions use one another 's styles to show very significant .
for a long time , actors from one region often did not adjust to the styles of the other region .
actors form schools or are part of a theatre .
every actor has a stage name , which is different from the name they were born with .
these stage names , most often those of the actor 's father , grandfather , or teacher , are passed down between generations of actors ' lineages , and hold great honor and importance .
many names are associated with certain roles or acting styles .
many actors will go through at least three names over the course of their career .
the shumei -lrb- [unk] [unk] -rrb- is a japanese word used to describe the " shumei " .
name successionhesis are grand naming ceremonies held in kabuki theatre in front of the audience .
most often , a number of actors will take part in a single ceremony , taking on new stage-names .
their work in a " shumei " represent their passage into a new chapter of their performing career .
