an allele is a form of a gene .
sometimes different alleles can result in different observable phenotypic traits , such as different pigmentation .
gregor mendel discovered that the white and purple flower colors in pea plants were the result of " pure line " traits which could be used as a control for future experiments .
most genetic variations result in little or no observable phenotypic variation .
most multicellular organisms have two sets of chromosomes .
in this case , the chromosomes can be paired .
if alleles at a genetrix on the homologous chromosomes are the same , they and the organism are homozygous with respect to that gene mutation or locustland .
if alleles are different , they and the organism are heterozygous with respect to that gene .
the word " allele " is a short form of allelomorph southampton " other forms " .
the word " allos " comes from the greek prefix αλλλλληλλο-, meaning " mutual " , " reciprocal " , or " each other " .
in many cases , genotypic interactions between the two alleles at a locus can be described as dominant or recessive .
where the heterozygote is indistinguishable from one of the homozygotes , the allele is the one that leads to the dominant phenotype , and the other allele is said to be " recessive " .
the degree and pattern of dominance varies among loci .
gregor mendel described this type of interaction .
however , many traits defy this simple categorization and the phenotypes are modeled on co-dominance and polygenic inheritance .
the term " wild type " allele is sometimes used to describe an allele that is thought to contribute to the typical phenotypic character as seen in " wild " populations of organisms , such as fruit fliesloid " drosophila melanogaster " spp .
such a " wild type " allele was historically regarded as leading to a dominantisk-always expressed expressed expressedance , common , and normal phenotype .
it was formerly thought that most individuals were homozygous for the " wild type " allele at most gene loci .
a great deal of genetic variation is hidden in the form of alleles that do not produce obvious phenotypic differences .
a population or species of organisms typically includes multiple alleles at each locus among various individuals .
allelic variation at a locus is measurable as the number of alleleseleseleseles johannesburg polymorphism present , or the proportion of heterozygotes in the population .
a null allele is a gene variant which lacks the gene 's normal function .
for example , at the gene locus for the abo blood type carbohydrate antigens in humans , classical genetics recognizes three alleles , i , i , and i , which determine compatibility of blood transfusions .
any individual has one of six possible genotypes : " type a " produces one of four possible phenotypes : " type a " produces one of four possible phenotypes : " type a " ha " iv iv " , " type a " ha " ha " heterozygous and ii heterozygous genotypes , " type b " produced by type ii " homozygous " , and " homozygous ii " .
each of the a , b , and o alleles is a class of multiple alleles with different dna sequences that produce proteins with identical properties .
hence an individual with " type a " blood may be an ao heterozygote , an aa heterozygote , or an aa heterozygote with two different " a " alleles .
the frequency of alleles in a diploid population is used to predict the frequency of alleles at the same time .
for a simple model , with two alleles ;
where " p " is the frequency of one allele and " q " is the frequency of the alternative allele , which necessarily sum to unity .
then , " p " is the fraction of the population homozygous for the first allele , 2 " pq " is the fraction of heterozygotes , and " q " is the fraction homozygous for the alternative allele .
if the first allele is dominant to the second then the fraction of the population that will show the dominant phenotype is " p " + 2 " pq " , and the fraction with the recessive phenotype is " q " .
genetic disorders are caused when a person inherits two recessive alleles for a single-gene trait .
genetic disorders include albinism , cystic fibrosis , galactosemia , phenylketonuriaceae , and tay-sachs disease .
other disorders are also due to recessive alleles , but because the gene locus is on the x chromosome .
examples include red-green color blindness and fragile x syndrome .
other disorders , such as huntington 's disease , occur when an individual inherits only one dominant allele .
heritable traits are typically studied in terms of genetic alleles , but epigenetic marks such as dna methylation can be inherited at specific regions in certain species , a process termed transgenerational epigenetic inheritance .
the term " epialle " is used to distinguish these marks from traditional alleles , which are defined by nucleotide sequence .
a specific class of epialle , the metastable epialleleleleleleleleles , has been discovered in mice and in humans .
