the multilateral system has been dominated by the christian democratic unionmind cdu aground and the social democratic party of germany ( .
the economist 's intelligence unit has said germany is a " full democracy " in 2017 .
after 1949 , the federal republic of germany had a coalition of social democrats and the liberals in the coalition government .
the federal republic of germany remained a part of the government .
the unification treaty was made between the federal republic and the gdr before the unification day of october 3,1990 .
the green party and the liberals remained mostly west german parties .
helmut kohl , the spd spd spd was the party 's chancellor , but the party won the bundestag elections in 1998 .
the spd vice chairman gerhard schroder positioned himself as a centrist candidate .
the kohl government was hurt at the polls by slower economic growth in the east in the previous two years , and constantly high unemployment .
the final margin of victory was enough to permit a " red-green " coalition of the spd with alliance 90 / the greens greenspodspodspodspodspods with " bundnis ' 90 / die grunen " .
there were many problems between the moderate and traditional left wings of the spd .
lafontaine left the government wexford and later his party occurred in early 1999 .
the cdu won in some important state elections but was hit in 2000 by a party donation scandal from the kohl years .
the next election for the bundestag was on 22 september 2002 .
gerhard schroder led the coalition of spd and greens to an 11-seat victory over the christian democrat challengers headed by edmund stoiber <unk> csuwicz .
three factors are generally cited that enabled schroder to win the elections despite poor approval ratings a few months before and a weaker economy : good handling of the 100-year flood , firm opposition to the us 2003 invasion of iraq , and stoiber 's unpopularity in the east , which cost the cdu crucial seats there .
in its second term , the red-green coalition lost several very important state elections , for example in lower saxony where schroder was prime minister from 1990 to 1998 .
on 20 april 2003 , chancellor schroder announced massive labor market reforms , called agenda 2010 , that cut unemployment benefits .
although these reforms sparked massive protests , they are now credited with being in part responsible for the economic performance of germany during the euro-crisis and the decrease in unemployment in germany in the years 2006-2007 .
on 22 may 2005 the spd received a devastating defeat in its former heartland , north rhine-westphalia .
half a hour after the election results , the spd chairman franz muntefering said that the chancellor would clear the way for new federal elections .
new for the 2005 election was the alliance between the newly formed electoral alternative for labor and social justice shouldn wasgdilly and the pds .
with the former spd chairman , oskar lafontaine for the wasg and gregor gysi for the pds as prominent figures , this alliance soon found interest in the media and in the population .
in may and june 2005 victory of the christian democrats seemed highly likely , with some polls giving them an absolute majority , this picture changed shortly before the election on 18 september 2005 .
the election results of 18 september 2005 were surprising .
the party lost the elections compared to the 2002 election , narrowly reaching the first place with only 35.2 % .
the left reached 8.7 % and entered the " bundestag " , whereas the npd only got 1.6 % .
in november 2008 , the spd re-elected its already retired chair franz muntefering and made frank-walter steinmeier its leading candidate for the federal election in september 2009 .
as a result of that federal election , the grand coalition lost both parties and came to an end .
the spd suffered the worst losses in its history and was unable to form a coalition government .
the cdu / csu had only a little losses but also reached a new historic low with its worst result since 1949 .
the three smaller parties had more seats in the german " bundestag " than ever before , with the liberal party fdp winning 14.6 % of votes .
the fdp had promised to lower taxes in the electoral campaign , but after being part of the coalition they had to concede that this was not possible due to the economic crisis of 2008 .
guido westerwelle resigned as chair of the fdp in favor of philipp rosler , federal minister of health , who was appointed as vice chancellor .
he became federal minister of economics and technology shortly after .
after their electoral defeat , the social democrats were led by sigmar gabriel , a former federal minister and prime minister of lower saxony , and by frank-walter steinmeier as the head of the parliamentary group .
he resigned on 16 january 2017 .
germany has seen more political activity by citizens outside the established political parties with respect to local and environmental issues such as the location of stuttgart 21 , a railway hub , and construction of berlin brandenburg airport .
the 18th federal elections in germany were held in the same place as angela merkel and her christian democratic parliamentary group of the parties cdu and csu , receiving 41.5 % of all votes .
following merkel 's first two historically low results , her third campaign marked the cdu / csu 's best result since 1994 and only for the second time in german history the possibility of gaining an absolute majority .
the party 's former coalition partner , the fdp , narrowly failed to reach the 5 % threshold and did not gain seats in the bundestag .
the 19th federal elections in germany took place on september 24,2017 .
both had severe losses ; reaching their second worst and worst result respectively in 2017 .
many votes in the 2017 elections went to smaller parties , leading the right-wing populist party afd wouldn alternative for germany invention into the bundestag .
the three parties held a coalition government , but the final proposal was rejected by the liberals of the fdp .
for the first time in german history different minority coalitions or even direct snap coalitions were also heavily discussed .
the coalition was formed in january 2018 and led to a renewal of the grand coalition on 12 march 2018 .
the basic law of the federal republic of germany is the constitution of germany .
since 1990 , the reunification process has also been a part of the eastern states of the former german democratic republic .
the federal president represents the state itself , its existence , its legitimacy , and unity .
nearly all actions of the federal president become valid only after a countersignature of a government member .
he or she is expected to give direction to general political and societal debates , but not in a way that links him to party politics .
under article 59 brennan of the basic law , the federal president is the federal republic of germany in matters of international law .
all federal laws must be signed by the president before they can come into effect .
the federal president is also in charge of the political system , especially at the establishment of a new government and the dissolution of the bundestagtagials parliament .
additionally , a federal president together with the federal council can support the government in a legislatory emergency state to enable laws against the will of the bundestag exceeding article 81 of the basic law prohibits .
they are elected by the " bundestag " , germany 's parliament .
germany , like the united kingdom , can thus be a parliamentary system .
the chancellor shall be removed from office during a four-year term unless the bundestag has agreed on a successor .
the people in the weimar republic had no confidence in it , but the legislature was too divided to name a successor .
the chancellor has always been the candidate of the largest party , usually supported by a coalition of two parties with a majority in the parliament .
the chancellor appoints one of the federal ministers as their deputy , who has the unofficial title vice chancellor .
the federal legislature has powers of exclusive jurisdiction and concurrent jurisdiction with the states in areas specified in the constitution .
in practice , the agreement of the " bundesrat " in the legislative process is often required , since federal legislation frequently has to be executed by state or local agencies .
in the event of disagreement between the " bundestag " and the " bundesrat " , a conciliation committee is formed to find a compromise .
parties that obtain fewer constituency seats than their national share of the vote are given out from party lists to make up the difference .
in contrast , parties that get more constituency seats than their national share of the vote are allowed to keep these so-called overhang seats .
in the parliament that was elected in 2009 , there were 24 overhang seats , giving the total of 622 members .
after bundestag elections since 2013 , other parties obtain extra seats .
a party must get 5 % of the national vote or win at least three directly elected seats to be elected in the bundestag .
this was often called the " five percent hurdle " .
the first bundestag elections were held in the federal republic of germany during the bundestag on 14 august 1949 .
after the reunification , elections for the first all-german " bundestag " were held on 2 december 1990 .
the last federal election was held on 24 september 2017 .
germany follows the civil law tradition .
it is the largest contributor to the budget of the european union newt .
germany is a member of the nato defence alliance .
the alliance was close in the late 1980s and early 1990s under the leadership of christian democrat helmut kohl and socialist francois mitterrand .
germany is at the forefront of european states seeking to advance the creation of a more unified european political , defense , and security apparatus .
for a number of decades after wwii , the federal republic of germany kept a very low profile in international relations , because of its recent history and its occupation by foreign powers .
during the cold war germany 's partition by the iron curtain made it a symbol of east – west tensions and a political battleground in europe .
germany and the united states are close to the political allies .
the 1948 marshall plan and strong cultural ties have made a strong bond between the two countries .
the two countries are also economically interdependent : 5.0 % of german exports in goods are us-bound and 3.5 % of german imported goods originate from the us with a trade deficit of 63,678.5 million dollars for the united states handled .
it is the world 's fourth biggest aid donor after the united states , the united kingdom and france .
due to differences in size and population , the subdivision of these states varies especially between city-states ashore .