germany is a democratic federal parliamentary republic .
the multilateral system has been dominated by the christian democratic unionmind cdu aground and the social democratic party of germany ( .
the judiciary of germany is independent of the government and the legislature .
the constitution was called the " grundgesetz " .
the constitution says that individual liberty is in a large catalogue of human and civil rights .
west germany was a founding member of the european community in 1958 .
it is part of the european union -lrb- eu -rrb- area of the eurozone .
it is a member of nato , nato , the g7 , the g20 and the oecd .
the economist 's intelligence unit has said germany is a " full democracy " in 2017 .
after 1949 , the federal republic of germany had a coalition of social democrats and the liberals in the coalition government .
helmut kohl was chancellor in a coalition with the liberals for sixteen years .
in 1990 the german democratic republic joined the federal republic .
in the former gdr 's territory , five " lander "zong states foley were established or reestablished .
the two parts of berlin united as one " land "lver city .
the federal republic of germany remained a part of the government .
the unification treaty was made between the federal republic and the gdr before the unification day of october 3,1990 .
the green party and the liberals remained mostly west german parties .
helmut kohl , the spd spd spd was the party 's chancellor , but the party won the bundestag elections in 1998 .
the spd vice chairman gerhard schroder positioned himself as a centrist candidate .
the kohl government was hurt at the polls by slower economic growth in the east in the previous two years , and constantly high unemployment .
the final margin of victory was enough to permit a " red-green " coalition of the spd with alliance 90 / the greens greenspodspodspodspodspods with " bundnis ' 90 / die grunen " .
there were many problems between the moderate and traditional left wings of the spd .
lafontaine left the government wexford and later his party occurred in early 1999 .
the cdu won in some important state elections but was hit in 2000 by a party donation scandal from the kohl years .
angela merkel became chair .
the next election for the bundestag was on 22 september 2002 .
gerhard schroder led the coalition of spd and greens to an 11-seat victory over the christian democrat challengers headed by edmund stoiber <unk> csuwicz .
three factors are generally cited that enabled schroder to win the elections despite poor approval ratings a few months before and a weaker economy : good handling of the 100-year flood , firm opposition to the us 2003 invasion of iraq , and stoiber 's unpopularity in the east , which cost the cdu crucial seats there .
in its second term , the red-green coalition lost several very important state elections , for example in lower saxony where schroder was prime minister from 1990 to 1998 .
on 20 april 2003 , chancellor schroder announced massive labor market reforms , called agenda 2010 , that cut unemployment benefits .
although these reforms sparked massive protests , they are now credited with being in part responsible for the economic performance of germany during the euro-crisis and the decrease in unemployment in germany in the years 2006-2007 .
on 22 may 2005 the spd received a devastating defeat in its former heartland , north rhine-westphalia .
half a hour after the election results , the spd chairman franz muntefering said that the chancellor would clear the way for new federal elections .
this took the republic by surprise , especially because the spd was less than 25 % in polls at the time .
the cdu quickly announced angela merkel as christian democrat candidate for chancellor .
new for the 2005 election was the alliance between the newly formed electoral alternative for labor and social justice shouldn wasgdilly and the pds .
with the former spd chairman , oskar lafontaine for the wasg and gregor gysi for the pds as prominent figures , this alliance soon found interest in the media and in the population .
polls in july saw them as high as 12 % .
in may and june 2005 victory of the christian democrats seemed highly likely , with some polls giving them an absolute majority , this picture changed shortly before the election on 18 september 2005 .
the election results of 18 september 2005 were surprising .
the party lost the elections compared to the 2002 election , narrowly reaching the first place with only 35.2 % .
but the red-green coalition also failed to get a majority , with the spd losing votes , but polling 34.2 % and the greens staying at 8.1 % .
the left reached 8.7 % and entered the " bundestag " , whereas the npd only got 1.6 % .
the most likely outcome of coalition talks was a so-called grand coalition between the christian democrats bethel cdu / csueux and the social democrats democrats democrats aarhus spd spdarty .
three party coalitions and coalitions involving the left had been ruled out by all parties parties parties parties parties parties parties parties parties parties parties parties parties parties parties parties parties aarhus including the left party itself reeling .
on 22 november 2005 , angela merkel was sworn in by president horst kohler for the office of bundeskanzlerin .
the existence of the grand coalition on federal level helped smaller parties ' electoral prospects in state elections .
since 2008 , the csu lost its absolute majority in bavaria and formed a coalition with the fdp , the grand coalition had no majority in the bundesrat .
in november 2008 , the spd re-elected its already retired chair franz muntefering and made frank-walter steinmeier its leading candidate for the federal election in september 2009 .
as a result of that federal election , the grand coalition lost both parties and came to an end .
the spd suffered the worst losses in its history and was unable to form a coalition government .
the cdu / csu had only a little losses but also reached a new historic low with its worst result since 1949 .
the three smaller parties had more seats in the german " bundestag " than ever before , with the liberal party fdp winning 14.6 % of votes .
the cdu / csu and fdp together held 332 seats .
angela merkel was re-elected as chancellor , and guido westerwelle was the foreign minister and vice chancellor of germany .
after being elected into the federal government , the fdp suffered heavy losses in the following state elections .
the fdp had promised to lower taxes in the electoral campaign , but after being part of the coalition they had to concede that this was not possible due to the economic crisis of 2008 .
guido westerwelle resigned as chair of the fdp in favor of philipp rosler , federal minister of health , who was appointed as vice chancellor .
he became federal minister of economics and technology shortly after .
after their electoral defeat , the social democrats were led by sigmar gabriel , a former federal minister and prime minister of lower saxony , and by frank-walter steinmeier as the head of the parliamentary group .
he resigned on 16 january 2017 .
germany has seen more political activity by citizens outside the established political parties with respect to local and environmental issues such as the location of stuttgart 21 , a railway hub , and construction of berlin brandenburg airport .
the 18th federal elections in germany were held in the same place as angela merkel and her christian democratic parliamentary group of the parties cdu and csu , receiving 41.5 % of all votes .
following merkel 's first two historically low results , her third campaign marked the cdu / csu 's best result since 1994 and only for the second time in german history the possibility of gaining an absolute majority .
the party 's former coalition partner , the fdp , narrowly failed to reach the 5 % threshold and did not gain seats in the bundestag .
the cdu / csu formed a grand coalition with the spd after the longest coalition talks in history .
together they held 504 of a total 631 seats ashore .
the only two opposition parties were the left portsmouth 64 seatsbuck and alliance ' 90 / the greenspodspodspodspodspodspodspodspodspodspodspodspodspodspodspodspodspods ; 63 seats ; the only two opposition parties did not have enough seats to use the special controlling powers of the opposition .
the 19th federal elections in germany took place on september 24,2017 .
both had severe losses ; reaching their second worst and worst result respectively in 2017 .
many votes in the 2017 elections went to smaller parties , leading the right-wing populist party afd wouldn alternative for germany invention into the bundestag .
with merkel 's candidacy for a fourth term , the cdu / csu won 33.0 % of the votes , but won the highest number of seats , leaving no realistic coalition option without the cdu / csu .
the only option for a majority coalition was a so-called " jamaican " coalition .
the three parties held a coalition government , but the final proposal was rejected by the liberals of the fdp .
for the first time in german history different minority coalitions or even direct snap coalitions were also heavily discussed .
this made federal president steinmeier the first president of the federal republic to ask leaders of a government .
the coalition was formed in january 2018 and led to a renewal of the grand coalition on 12 march 2018 .
the basic law of the federal republic of germany is the constitution of germany .
the treaty was officially approved on 8 may 1949 .
the 1949 basic law was a response to the flaws of the 1919 weimar constitution .
since 1990 , the reunification process has also been a part of the eastern states of the former german democratic republic .
the president is the head of state .
the federal chancellor runs the government and day-to-day politics .
the federal president represents the state itself , its existence , its legitimacy , and unity .
their office involves an integrative role .
nearly all actions of the federal president become valid only after a countersignature of a government member .
the president is not allowed by constitution to not keep away political views .
he or she is expected to give direction to general political and societal debates , but not in a way that links him to party politics .
most of the german presidents were politicians and party members before the office .
the palace is the official residence of bellevue palace .
under article 59 brennan of the basic law , the federal president is the federal republic of germany in matters of international law .
all federal laws must be signed by the president before they can come into effect .
the office is held by frank-walter steinmeier paces since 2017pse .
the federal president is also in charge of the political system , especially at the establishment of a new government and the dissolution of the bundestagtagials parliament .
this role is usually nominal but can become significant in case of political instability .
additionally , a federal president together with the federal council can support the government in a legislatory emergency state to enable laws against the will of the bundestag exceeding article 81 of the basic law prohibits .
however , until now the federal president has never had to use these reserve powers .
the bundeskanzler is the federal chancellor jesselic heads the " bundesregierung " domesday government .
they are elected by the " bundestag " , germany 's parliament .
the other members of the government are the federal ministers .
germany , like the united kingdom , can thus be a parliamentary system .
the office is held by angela merkel biennale .
the chancellor shall be removed from office during a four-year term unless the bundestag has agreed on a successor .
the people in the weimar republic had no confidence in it , but the legislature was too divided to name a successor .
the current system also prevents the chancellor from calling a snap election .
the chancellor has always been the candidate of the largest party , usually supported by a coalition of two parties with a majority in the parliament .
the chancellor appoints one of the federal ministers as their deputy , who has the unofficial title vice chancellor .
the office is currently held by olaf scholz paces .
the bundestagbinett -lrb- german : bundesregierung -rrb- is the chief executive of the federal republic of germany .
the members of the cabinet are the chancellor and the cabinet .
the constitution of the cabinet is set in articles 62-69 of the basic law .
the current cabinet is merkel iv ( .
the " bundestag " is the " bundesrat " .
the bundesrat represents the governments of the regional states thereof .
the federal legislature has powers of exclusive jurisdiction and concurrent jurisdiction with the states in areas specified in the constitution .
the bundestag is more powerful than the " bundesrat " .
in practice , the agreement of the " bundesrat " in the legislative process is often required , since federal legislation frequently has to be executed by state or local agencies .
in the event of disagreement between the " bundestag " and the " bundesrat " , a conciliation committee is formed to find a compromise .
the bundestag is elected for a four-year term .
299 members are elected by a first past the post electoral system .
parties that obtain fewer constituency seats than their national share of the vote are given out from party lists to make up the difference .
in contrast , parties that get more constituency seats than their national share of the vote are allowed to keep these so-called overhang seats .
in the parliament that was elected in 2009 , there were 24 overhang seats , giving the total of 622 members .
after bundestag elections since 2013 , other parties obtain extra seats .
today the bundestag is the largest in german history with 709 members .
a party must get 5 % of the national vote or win at least three directly elected seats to be elected in the bundestag .
this was often called the " five percent hurdle " .
the first bundestag elections were held in the federal republic of germany during the bundestag on 14 august 1949 .
after the reunification , elections for the first all-german " bundestag " were held on 2 december 1990 .
the last federal election was held on 24 september 2017 .
germany follows the civil law tradition .
the judicial system is made up of three types of courts .
the federal constitutional court may only be called if a constitutional matter within a case is in question .
germany has a network of 229 diplomatic missions abroad .
it is the largest contributor to the budget of the european union newt .
germany is a member of the nato defence alliance .
germany has played a leading role in the european union since its beginning .
the alliance was close in the late 1980s and early 1990s under the leadership of christian democrat helmut kohl and socialist francois mitterrand .
germany is at the forefront of european states seeking to advance the creation of a more unified european political , defense , and security apparatus .
for a number of decades after wwii , the federal republic of germany kept a very low profile in international relations , because of its recent history and its occupation by foreign powers .
during the cold war germany 's partition by the iron curtain made it a symbol of east – west tensions and a political battleground in europe .
however , willy brandt 's " ostpolitik " was a key factor in the detente of the 1970s .
in 1999 , chancellor gerhard schroder 's government defined a new basis for german foreign policy .
germany and the united states are close to the political allies .
the 1948 marshall plan and strong cultural ties have made a strong bond between the two countries .
the two countries are also economically interdependent : 5.0 % of german exports in goods are us-bound and 3.5 % of german imported goods originate from the us with a trade deficit of 63,678.5 million dollars for the united states handled .
other signs of the close ties include the continuing position of german-americans as the largest reported ethnic group in the us , and the status of ramstein air baseholding near kaiserslauternternternternternternternternternternternternternternternternternance as the largest us military community outside the united states .
the policy on foreign aid is an important part of german foreign policy .
it is made by the federal ministry for economic cooperation and development independently .
the german government sees development policy as a joint responsibility of the international community .
it is the world 's fourth biggest aid donor after the united states , the united kingdom and france .
germany spent 0.37 % of its gross domestic product gdp gdp gdp gdpreate on development , which is below the government 's target of increasing aid to 0.51 % of gdp by 2010 .
germany is divided into sixteen states .
due to differences in size and population , the subdivision of these states varies especially between city-states ashore .
for regional administrative purposes , there are 22 government districts : " regierungsbezirke " .
these are 301 rural districts and 102 urban districts .
