the flag of greenland was designed by greenlander thue christiansen .
it has two equal horizontal bands of whiterrado toprdon and red with a large disk .
the top half of the disk is red .
the top half of the flag looks like the flag of japan .
the entire flag measures 18 by 12 parts .
its local name in the greenlandic language is erfalasorput , which means " our flag " .
the term " aappalaartoq " was also used for the red " denmark denmark denmark denmark denmark denmark denmark denmark denmark denmark denmark denmark denmark denmark denmark denmark denmark denmark denmark denmark shall have " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " " "
today greenlanders display both the erfalasorput and the dannebrog .
the flag of greenland is the national flag of a nordic country or territory without a nordic cross .
greenland first entertained the idea of a flag of its own in 1973 .
the following year , a newspaper solicited eleven design proposals .
the flag of denmark was chosen from the flag of denmark .
little of this effort was done .
in 1978 , denmark granted home rule to greenland , making it an equal member of the danish kingdom .
the home rule government had an official call for flag proposals , receiving 555 忠 of which 293 were submitted by greenlanders reeling .
the deciding committee came to no agree , so more proposals were solicited .
finally the present red-and-white design by christiansen narrowly won over a green-and-white nordic cross by a vote of fourteen to eleven .
christiansen 's flag was adopted on june 21,1985 .
the greenland post office issued commemorative postage stamps and a leaflet by the flag 's creator .
he described the white stripe as representing the glaciers and ice cap , which cover more than 80 % of the island ; the red stripe , the ocean ; the red semicircle , the sun , with its bottom part sunk in the ocean ; and the white semicircle , the icebergs and pack ice .
the design is also reminiscent of the setting sun half-submerged below the horizon and reflected on the sea .
in 1985 , the public was made aware that greenland 's flag had exactly the same motif as the flag of the danish rowing club hei rosport .
it is not clear whether this is a case of plagiarism or just a coincidence .
the colours of the erfalasorput are the same as those of the dannebrog , symbolizing greenland 's place in the danish realm .
