a paradeylus is a group of people who are organized along a street , often dressed in costume , and often accompanied by marching bands , floats , or large balloons .
parades are held for a wide range of reasons , but are usually for celebrations of some kind .
in britain , the term parade is usually reserved for either military parades or other occasions where participants march in formation .
in the canadian forces , the term also means some less formal connotations .
protest demonstrations can also take the form of a parade , but such cases are usually referred to as a march instead .
the parade float got its name because the first floats were decorated barges that were towed along canals with ropes held by paraders on the shore .
floats were occasionally propelled from within by concealed oarsmen , but the practice was abandoned because of the high incidence of drowning when the lightweight and unstable frames capsized .
towed by horses was a ceremony in memory of recently drowned parade oarsmen .
parade floats are usually pulled by motor vehicles or are powered by themselves .
multiple grand marshals may often be designated for an iteration of the parade .
a " community grand marshal " or other designations may be selected alongside a " grand marshal " to lead the front or other parts of the parade .
since the advent of such technology , it became possible for aircraft and boats to parade .
a flypast is an aerial parade of anything from one to dozens of aircraft , both in commercial context at airshows and also to mark , e . g . , national days or significant anniversaries .
they are most common in the united kingdom , where they are often associated with royal occasions .
tall shipsaring as was seen during the celebrations of the 60th anniversary of world war ii .
the longest parade in the world is the hanover schutzenfest that takes place in hanover every year during the schutzenfest .
the parade is 12 kilometers long with more than 12,000 participants from all over the world .
at the end of hostilities in europe in 1944-45 , " victory parades " were common in the newly liberated territories .
for example , on 3 september 1944 , the 2nd canadian infantry division marched six abreast to the music of massed regimental pipe and drum bands through the streets of dieppe , france to commemorate the liberation of the city from german occupation .
on the moscow victory parade of 1945 held in moscow , soviet union in june 1945 , the red army commemorated victory in europe with a parade and the ceremonial destruction of captured wehrmacht and waffen-ss standards .
