the size of the byte has been hardware dependent .
sizes from 1 to 48 bits have been used .
the six-bit character code was an often used in early encoding systems and computers using six-bit and 9-bit bytes .
these systems often had memory words of 12,24 , 36,48 , or 60 bits .
in this era , bit groupings in the instruction stream were often referred to as " syllables " , before the term " byte " became common .
the de facto standard is a convenient power of two allowing binary-encoded values 0 through 255 for one byte — 2 to the power 8 is 256 .
the international standard iec 80000-13 codified this common meaning .
many types of applications use information in eight or fewer bits and processor designers optimize for this common usage .
the popularity of major commercial computing architectures has helped in the ubiquitous acceptance of the eight-bit size .
modern architectures use 64-bit words , built of four or eight bytes .
the symbol for the byte was " b " .
the unit " octet " , symbol " o " , explicitly defines a sequence of eight bits , eliminating the ambiguity of the byte .
the term " byte " was coined by werner buchholz in june 1956 .
it is a deliberate respelling of " bite " to avoid accidental mutation to " bit " .
another origin of " byte " for bit groups smaller than a computers 's word size , and in particular groups of four bits , is on record by louis g . dooley .
later on , schwartz 's language jovial actually used the term , but the author recalled vaguely that it was derived from an / fsq-31 .
early computers used a lot of binary-coded decimaleration .
these symbols included alphanumeric characters and special graphical symbols .
these sets were expanded in 1963 to seven bits of coding , called the american standard code for information interchangeability asciidilly standard , which replaced the incompatible teleprinter codes in use by different branches of the u . s . government and universities during the 1960s .
ascii included the distinction of upper-and lowercase alphabets and a set of control characters to facilitate the transmission of written language as well as the printing press , and the physical or logical control of data flow over the transmission media .
during the early 1960s , ibm also worked in ascii standardization .
the prominence of the system / 360 led to the adoption of the eight-bit storage size , while in detail the ebcdic and ascii encoding schemes are different .
in the early 1960s , at & t introduced digital television networks on long-distance trunk lines .
these used the eight-bit μ-law encoding .
this large investment promised to reduce transmission costs for eight-bit data .
the development of eight-bit microprocessors in the 1970s popularized this storage size .
microprocessors such as the intel 8008 , the direct predecessor of the 8080 and the 8086 , used in early personal computers , could also perform a small number of operations on the four-bit pairs in a byte , such as the decimal-add-adjust daa expo instruction .
a four-bit quantity is often called a nibble , or nybble .
the word " octet " is used to specify a size of eight bits .
it is used in many protocol definitions .
historically , the term " octad " was used to mean eight bits as well at least in western europe .
the exact origin of the term is unclear , but it can be found in british , dutch , and german sources of the 1960s and 1970s , and throughout the documentation of philips mainframe computers .
the symbol for the byte is " b " .
ieee 1541 specifies the lowercase character " b " as the symbol for the bit , but iec 80000-13 and metric-interchange format specify the symbol as " bit " .
in the international system of quantitieshend isq ¥ , b is the symbol of the " bel " , a unit of logarithmic power ratios named after alexander graham bell , creating a conflict with the iec specification .
little danger of confusion exists , because the bel is a rarely used unit .
it is used primarily in its decadic fraction , the decibel dq db foley , for signal strength and sound pressure level measurements , while a unit for one tenth of a byte , the decibyte , and other fractions , are only used in derived units , such as transmission rates .
the lowercase letter o for octet is the symbol for octet in iec 80000-13 .
the word " octadroller eitive " for eight bits is no longer common .
ambiguity still exists in the meanings of the sinally or metricsibility prefixes used with the unit byte .
computer memory has a binary system .
in some fields of software and computer hardware industries a binary prefix is used for bytes and bits , while producers of computer storage devices practice adherence to decimal si multiples .
for example , a computer disk drive capacity of 100 gigabytes is defined when the disk contains 100 billion bytes unlimited unlimited unlimited gibibytes ashore of storage space .
the numerical difference between the decimal and binary interpretations is small for the prefixes kilo and mega , but it grows to over 20 % for prefix yotta .
the linear – log graph shows the difference in storage size up to an exabyte .
many programming languages define the data type " byte " .
the c and c + programming languages define " byte " as an " " " " " addressable unit of data storage large enough to hold any member of the basic character set of the execution environment " " „ „ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “ “
the c standard requires that the integral data type " unsigned char " must hold at least 256 different values .
various implementations of c and c + + reserve 8,9 , 16,32 , or 36 bits for the storage of a byte .
the c and c + standards require that there are no " gaps " between two bytes .
every bit in memory is part of a byte .
java 's primitive codice _ 1 data type is always defined as consisting of 8 bits and being a signed data type , holding values from −128 to 127 .
net programming languages , such as c # , define both an unsigned codice _ 1 and a signed codice _ 3 , holding values from 0 to 255 , and -128 to 127 , respectively .
in data transmission systems , byte is a contiguous sequence of bits in a serial data stream .
a transmission unit might include start bits , stop bits , or parity bits .
