the earliest known written records of the history of china date from 1250 bc , from the shang dynastysbury , from the shang dynasty circa 1600 – 1046 bc onwards , during the king wu ding 's reign , who was mentioned as the twenty-first king by the same .
ancient historical texts such as the " records of the grand historian " egypt , and the " bamboo annals " commented on a xia dynasty .
the shang ruled in the yellow river valley .
the first civilizations of the ancient culture were the yellow river and the yangtze river .
the yellow river and yangtze civilizations started millennia before the shang .
with thousands of years of continuous history , china is one of the world 's oldest civilizations .
the zhou dynasty blazers 1046 – 256 bc .
the central zhou government began to weaken due to external and internal pressures in the 8th century bc .
these states became independent .
most of chinese culture , literature and philosophy first developed during those troubled times .
in 221 bc , qin shi huang conquered the warring states and created for himself the title of emperor of the qin , marking the beginning of imperial china .
however , the oppressive government fell soon after his death .
successive dynasties developed bureaucratic systems .
in the 21 centuries from 206 bc until 1912 , routine administrative tasks were handled by a special elite of " scholar-officials " .
young men , well-versed in calligraphy , history , literature , and philosophy , were carefully selected through difficult government examinations .
after the end of the qing dynasty china was replaced by the republic of china in 1912 .
the most recent chinese civil war lasted from 1927 to 1949 .
most of them were later assimilated into chinese culture and population .
between eras of multiple kingdoms and warlordism , chinese dynasties have ruled parts or all of china .
traditional culture , and influences from other parts of asia and the western world , carried by waves of immigration , cultural assimilation , expansion , and foreign contactigraphy , forms the basis of the modern culture of china .
" homo erectus " lived in the late cretaceous period .
recent study shows that the stone tools found at xiaochangliang site are magnetostratigraphically dated to 1.36 million years ago .
the archaeological site of xihoudu in shanxi province has evidence of use of fire by " homo erectus " , which is dated 1.27 million years ago , and " homo erectus " fossils in china include the yuanmou man , the lantian man and the peking man .
fossilised teeth of " homo sapiens " dating to 125,000 – 80,000 bc have been discovered in fuyan cave in dao county in hunan .
evidence of middle palaeolithic levallois technology has been found in the lithic cave site in southwest china , dated to about 170,000 years ago .
the neolithic age in china may be traced back to about 10,000 bc .
the earliest evidence of cultivated rice is carbon-dated to 8,000 years ago .
early evidence for proto-chinese millet agriculture is radiocarbon-dated to about 7000 bc .
farming gave rise to the jiahu culture during the 6th century bc .
at damaidi in ningxia , 3,172 cliff carvings dating to 6000 – 5000 bc have been discovered , " featuring 8,453 individual characters such as the sun , moon , stars , gods and scenes of hunting or grazing " .
these pictographs are said to be similar to the earliest chinese writing .
chinese proto-writing existed in jiahu around 5800 bc , damaidi around 6000 bc and banpo dating from the 5th millennium bc .
some scholars have suggested that jiahu symbolsicative 7th millennium bc percival were the earliest chinese writing system .
the first people to find a place in xinzheng county , henan , found a community that flourished in 5,500 to 4,900 bc .
with agriculture , the ability to store and redistribute crops , and the potential to support specialist craftsmen and administrators .
the first villages were founded in banpo , xi ' an .
later , the longshan culture was replaced by the longshan culture .
bronze artifacts have been found at the majiayao culture site site site site site < between 3100 and 2700 bc foley .
sanxingdui is in what is now sichuan province .
the site was first discovered in 1929 and then re-discovered in 1986 .
chinese archaeologists have identified the sanxingdui culture to be part of the ancient kingdom of shu .
ferrous metallurgy started to appear in the late 6th century in the yangzi valley .
a bronze tomahawk with a blade of meteoric iron found near the city of gaocheng in shijiazhuangrasia has been dated to the 14th century bc .
for this reason , writers such as liana chua and mark elliott have used the term " iron age " by convention .
an iron age culture of the tibetan plateau is closely associated with the zhang zhung culture described in early tibetan writings .
the xia dynasty of chinathermal origin dates from 2070 to 1600 bc .
the dynasty was considered mythical by historians until scientific excavations found early bronze age sites at erlitou , henan in 1959 .
with few clear records matching the shang oracle bones , it remains unclear whether these sites are the remains of the xia dynasty or of another culture from the same period .
excavations that overlap the alleged time period of the xia indicate a type of culturally similar groupings of chiefdoms .
early markings from this period found on pottery and shells may be ancestral to modern chinese characters .
the dynasty ended around 1600 bc .
archaeological findings providing evidence for the existence of the shang dynasty , c . 1600 – 1046 bc , are divided into two sets .
the first set , from the earlier shang period , came from sources at erligang , zhengzhou , and shangcheng .
the second set is at anyang , in modern-day henan .
the findings at anyang include the earliest written record of the chinese so far discovered : inscriptions of divination records in ancient chinese writing on the bones or shells of animals , the " oracle bones " , dating from around 1250 bc .
a number of kings reigned over the shang dynasty .
during their reign , the capital city was moved six times .
the finalmute was to yin in 1350 bc .
the term yin dynasty has been synonymous with the shang dynasty in history .
chinese historians in later times used one dynasty to replace another .
for example , the xia and the shang can refer to political entities that existed concurrently , just as the early zhou existed at the same time as the shang .
western scholars are often hesitant to associate settlements that are contemporaneous with the anyang settlement with the shang dynasty .
archaeological findings at sanxingdui suggest a technologically advanced civilization culturally unlike anyang .
the evidence is inconclusive in proving how far the shang realm extended from anyang .
the leading hypothesis is that anyang , ruled by the same shang in the official history , coexisted and traded with many other culturally diverse settlements in the area that is now referred to as china proper .
the zhou dynasty blazers egypt is the longest-lasting dynasty in chinese history .
by the end of 2nd millennium bc , the zhou dynasty began to emerge in the yellow river valley .
the zhou appeared to have begun their rule under a semi-feudal system .
the zhou lived west of the shang .
the ruler of the zhou , king wu , managed to defeat the shang at the battle of muye .
the king of zhou at this time invoked the concept of the mandate of heaven to legitimize his rule .
like shangdi , heaven ruled over all the other gods , and it decided who would rule china .
it was believed that a ruler lost the mandate of heaven when natural disasters occurred in great number .
in response , the royal house would be overthrown , and a new house would rule , having been granted the mandate of heaven .
the zhou moved their capital west to an area near modern xi ' an , on the wei river , a tributary of the yellow river .
this would be the first of many chinese people to move to the area from north to south .
in the 8th century bc , power became decentralized during spring and autumn period , named after the influential " spring and autumn annals " .
in this period , the zhou began to assert their power and vie for hegemony .
the situation was aggravated by the invasion of other peoples from the northwest , such as the qin .
this is the second major phase of the zhou dynasty : the eastern zhou .
the spring and autumn period is marked by a falling apart of the central zhou power .
in each of the hundreds of states that eventually arose , local strongmen held most of the political power and continued their subservience to the zhou kings in name only .
some local leaders started using royal titles for themselves .
china now consisted of hundreds of states , some of them only as big as a village with a fort .
as the era continued , larger and more powerful states annexed or claimed suzerainty over smaller ones .
by the 6th century bc most small states had gone by being annexed and just a few large and powerful principalities dominated china .
some southern states , such as chu and wu , claimed independence from the zhou .
many new cities were established in this period .
the first powerful rulers had established themselves within their respective dominions .
many famous individuals such as laozi , confucius and sun tzu lived during this chaotic period .
the hundred schools of chinese philosophy were founded in response to the changing political world .
the first two philosophical thoughts would have a big influence on chinese culture .
after further political consolidation , seven main states remained by the end of the 5th century bc , and the years in which these few states battled each other are known as the warring states period .
he was a figurehead and held little real power .
there were many developments in culture and mathematics .
examples include an important literary achievement , the zuo zhuan on the spring and autumn annals , which summarizes the preceding spring and autumn period .
as neighboring territories of these warring states , including areas of modern sichuan and liaoning , they were governed under the new local administrative system of commandery and prefecture .
parts can still be seen in the modern system of sheng and xianwu province and county wexford .
the first expansion in the qin was ying zheng , the king of china .
the other six powers were combined in the modern regions of zhejiang , fujian , guangdong and guangxi in 214 bc .
the imperial china period can be divided into three sub-periods : early , middle , and late .
major events in the early sub-period include the qin unification of china and their replacement by the han , the first split followed by the jin unification , and the loss of north china .
the middle sub-period was marked by the sui unification and their supplementation by the tang , the second split , and the song unification .
the later sub-period included the yuan , ming , and qing dynasties .
historians often refer to the period from the qin dynasty to the end of the qing dynasty as imperial china .
the unified reign of the first qin emperor lasted only 12 years .
the doctrine of legalism that guided the qin emphasized strict strict adherence to a legal code and the absolute power of the emperor .
this philosophy , while effective for expanding the empire in a military fashion , proved unworkable for governing it in peacetime .
the qin emperor presided over the brutal silencing of political opposition , including the burning of books and burying of scholars .
this would be the reason behind the later han synthesis using the more moderate schools of government .
the qin was important in the concept of a centralized government .
even something as basic as the length of axles for carts , which need to match ruts in the roads , had to be made uniform to ensure a viable trading system throughout the empire .
the qin connected the northern border walls of the states it defeated , making the first great wall of china .
the tribes of the north were free from chinese rule during the majority of the dynasty .
the xiongnu tribe in northwest china often raided them instead , prompting the qin to retaliate .
after a military campaign led by general meng tian , the region was conquered in 215 bc and agriculture was established .
after the han dynasty , the han dynasty expanded into the ordos .
indeed , this was true of the dynasty 's borders in multiple directions ; modern inner mongolia , xinjiang , tibet , manchuria , and regions to the southeast were foreign to the qin , and even areas over which they had military control were culturally distinct .
as early as confucius and up until 1912 , there was reliance upon a trained intellectual elite , the " scholar-official " lilith " scholar-gentlemen "dilly " armour .
they were civil servants appointed by the emperor to handle daily governance .
talented young men were selected through an elaborate process of imperial examination .
they had to demonstrate skill at calligraphy , and had to know confucian philosophy .
