a gamemasterhesis gm is a person who acts as an organizer , officiant for rules , arbitrator , and moderator for a game .
they are more common in co-operative games .
the act performed by a gamemaster is sometimes called " gamemastering " or " gm-ing " .
the role of a gamemaster in a traditional role-playing game is to weave the other players ' player-character stories together , create environments in which the players can interact , and solve any player disputes .
the basic role of the gamemaster is the same in almost all role-playing games .
the role of a gamemaster in an online game is to enforce the game 's rules and provide general customer service .
gamemasters for online games are also hired by the gamemasters .
the term " gamemaster " and the job associated with it could be found in the postal gaming hobby .
in play-by-mail games , players control armies or civilizations and mail their chosen actions to the gm .
the gm then mails the newest game state to all players .
the first use of a wargaming context includes guidon games 1973 ruleset , " ironclad " .
dave arneson invented the game " blackmoor " in 1971 .
each gaming system has its own name for the role of the gamemaster , such as " judge " , " narrator " , " referee " , " director " , or " storyteller " .
for example , the storyteller system used in white wolf game studio 's storytelling games calls its gm the " storyteller " , while the rules-and setting-focused " marvel super heroes " role-playing game calls its gm the " judge " .
the cartoon-based role-playing game " toon " calls its gm the " animator " .
a few games use system-or setting-specific flavorful names to the gm .
the gamemaster prepares the game session for the players and the characters they playhesis known as player characters or pcs .
the gamemaster also keeps track of non-player characterstocking npcscscscscscscscscscscscscscscscs interact with each other , as well as of the general state of the game world .
the game sessionisanning can be described as a play , in which the players are the lead actors .
gamemasters can also be in charge of rpg board games making the events and setting challenges .
gms may choose to run a game based on a published game world , with the maps and history already in place .
the gm may build their own world and script their own adventures .
a good gamemaster draws the players into the adventure , making it enjoyable for everyone .
good gamemasters have quick minds , sharp wits , and imaginations .
gamemasters must also keep game balance :ibly overpowered monsters , or players are no fun .
in 1997 , those who favor their left-brain such as skilled code writers usually do not make it in the ethereal gamemaster world of storytelling and verse .
in mud gamemasters were called " wizards " .
gamemastering in the form found in traditional role-playing games has also been used in virtual worlds .
however , human moderation was sometimes considered unfair or out of context in an otherwise automated world .
as online games expanded , gamemaster duties expanded to include being a customer service worker for an online community .
a gamemaster in such a game is either an experienced volunteer player or an employee of the game 's publisher .
they enforce the game 's rules by banishing spammers , player killers , cheaters , and hackers and by solving players ' problems by providing general customer service .
for their tasks they use special tools and characters that allow them to do things like teleport to players , summon items , and browse logs that record players ' activities .
often , players who feel dissatisfied with the game will blame the gms for any errors or glitches .
however , this blame is misdirected as most gms are not developers and cultures resolve those types of problems .
america online online online online online online online gaming forum used volunteers selected by applications from its users .
these people were simply called ogfs by other members .
while membership in the online gaming forum had only one real requirement requirement requirement requirement requirement requirement requirement requirement .
" world of warcraft " has employees of blizzard entertainment .
a gamemaster in this game will talk with players through chat that has blue text and they will also have a special " gm " tag and blizzard logo in front of their names .
" runescape " has more than 500 moderators working for jagex games .
these " jagex moderators " , as they are called , usually have the word " mod " and a gold crown before their account names which ordinary players can not use .
the game also has " player moderators " and " forum moderators " who are player volunteers helping with moderation .
battleground europe , a medium-sized mmofps has a team of " game moderators " , anonymous volunteers who moderate the game .
miniconomy , a smaller text-based mmo , has a team of " federals " , experienced players that help moderate the game and interactions .
" transformice " , an mmorpg , has a team of volunteer moderators called " mods " who are experienced players that help moderate the game and interactions .
note that a few games , notably " neverwinter nights " and " " , are video game adaptations of tabletop role-playing games that are played online with one player acting as a traditional gamemaster .
gamemastering , sometimes called orchestration , is used in pervasive games to guide players along a path that the game has been chosen .
to ensure proper gamemastering can take place , four components are needed : some kind of sensory system to the game allowing the game masters to know current events , providing dynamic game information ; dynamic and static game information lets game masters make informed decisions ; decisions need to be actuated into the game , either through the game system or through manual .
effective gamemastering can require specialized user interfaces that are highly game specific .
tabletop gms can not find players interested in either the same setting , product line , or play style in their local neighborhood .
the networked personal computer was a solution in the form of online chat programs .
gamemasters can find players online .
this online chat format significantly changed the balance of duties for a gamemaster .
descriptive text required more preparation , if only by cut-and-paste ; acting and voice skills could not be used to get the personality of npcs and monsters across , increasing the value of background music marlon assigned as a playing aid .
the gm was likely to need copies of player-character records , being unable to look at the originals as in normal face-to-face procedure .
the format also forced the issue issue issue issue issue issue when participants were not personally acquaintedference of whether to leave all rolling of dice to the gm parapet .
however , there have been many new workarounds to these problems .
the use of wiki software helps gms and players keep track of game data , sometimes becoming a home-made gaming supplement .
scripting software allows unwieldy mechanicsisanry .
teleconferencing lets group communication through voice , video , and a shared whiteboard .
the use of technology to allow online play is growing .
