the lord of the rings is a book written by j . r . r . tolkien .
it was a sequel to " the hobbit " .
tolkien wrote the story between 1937 and 1949 .
the book is about the main antagonist of the story the dark lord sauron .
the story is from quiet beginnings in the shire , a hobbit land not unlike the english countryside .
tolkien wanted to be one book of a two-volume set , the other to be " the silmarillion " , but this idea was dismissed by his publisher .
it was published in three parts between 1954 and 1955 .
the novel is divided internally into six books , two per volume , with several appendices of background material included at the end .
" the lord of the rings " has been translated into 38 languages .
although a major work in itself , the story was only the last movement of a larger epic tolkien worked on since 1917 .
influences on this earlier work , and on the story of " the lord of the rings " , include philology , mythology , religion and the author 's distaste for the effects of industrialization , as well as earlier fantasy works and tolkien 's experiences in world war i .
" the lord of the rings " is considered to have had a great effect on modern fantasy .
the popular use of " the lord of the rings " has led to many references in popular culture .
" the lord of the rings " has inspired , and continues to inspire , artwork , music , movies and television , video games , board games , and later literature .
award-winning " the lord of the rings " have been made for radio , theatre , and film .
the one ring is set in the middle of the book , and is the one that is the most powerful of the time of the dark lord sauron .
isildur lost the ring as an heirloom for his line , but when he was ambushed and killed by the orcs , the ring was lost in the river anduin .
the ring was found by a folk of deagol .
the ring gave him a long life and changed him over a lot of years into a creature called gollum .
meanwhile , sauron took back his old realm of mordor .
when gollum sets out in search of the ring , he was captured and tortured by sauron .
sauron said that " baggins " of the shire had taken the ring .
sauron , the king of the island , had to take over the ring and sent forth his servants , the nazgul , to seize it .
neither hobbit is aware of the ring 's nature , but gandalf the grey , a wizard and an old friend of bilbo , suspects it to be sauron 's ring .
he tells frodo that he is the king of the shire .
there they are helped by tom bombadil , a strange and merry fellow who lives with his wife .
the hobbits reach the town of bree .
on the hill of weathertop , they are attacked by the black riders , who wound frodo with a cursed blade .
the black riders nearly capture him at the ford of bruinen .
elrond tells the story of sauron and the ring .
gandalf tells the wizard saruman who has betrayed them and is now working to become a power in his own right .
the council decides that the ring must be destroyed , but that can only be done by sending it to the fire of mount doom in mordor , where it was forged .
the fellowship of the ring is the leader of the land of gondor .
after a failed attempt to cross the misty mountains over the redhorn pass , the company take the path through the mines of moria .
they travel down the river anduin to the hill of amon hen .
frodo decides to go alone to mordor , but sam thinks about what he intends and goes with him .
theoden musters his fighting strength and rides with his men to the ancient fortress of helm 's deep , while gandalf departs to seek help from treebeard .
meanwhile , the ents , captured by merry and pippin , attack isengard , saruman 's stronghold , and trap the wizard in the tower of orthanc .
gandalf brings an army of rohirrim to helm 's deep , and they defeat the orcs , who flee into the forest of huorns , never to be seen again .
saruman is a " palantir " , a seeing-stone that saruman used to speak with sauron and through which saruman was ensnared .
gollum knows the black gate of mordor .
faramir resists the temptation to seize the ring .
gollum betrays frodo by leading him to the great spider shelob in the tunnels of cirith ungol .
gandalf arrives at minas tirith to warn denethor of the attack .
he falls into despair .
he burns himself alive on a pyre , nearly taking his son faramir with him .
aragorn , legolas , gimli and the rangers of the north , take the paths of the dead to recruit the dead men of dunharrow , who are bound by a curse which denies them rest until they fight for the king of gondor .
aragorn defeats the corsairs and uses their ships to transport the men of southern gondor up the anduin , reaching minas tirith just in time to turn the tide of battle .
theoden 's niece eowyn , who joined the army in disguise , slays the lord of the nazgul with help from merry .
together , gondor and rohan defeat sauron 's army in the battle of the pelennor fields .
frodo and sam reach the edge of the cracks of doom , but frodo resists the ring any longer .
all he created collapses , the nazgul perish , and his armies are thrown into such disarray that aragorn 's forces emerge victorious .
the four hobbits go back to the shire , but they find that it has been taken over by men directed by one " sharkey " whom they later discover to be sarumaneux .
the war of the ring comes to its true end on frodo 's doorstep .
sam marries rosie cotton and uses his gifts from galadriel to help heal the shire .
a few years later , in the company of bilbo and gandalf , frodo sails from the grey havens west over the sea to the undying lands to find peace .
in the appendices , sam gives elanor the " red book of westmarch " , which contains the story of bilbo 's adventures and the war of the ring as witnessed by the hobbits .
some characters in " the lord of the rings " are fictional protagonists .
allen & unwin thought more stories about hobbits would be popular .
so at the age of 45 , tolkien began writing the story that would become " lord of the rings . "
the idea for the first chapter showed that the first chapter could be created by the people who were not the king of the rings was the reason behind bilbo 's disappearance , the significance of the ring , and the title " the lord of the rings " did not arrive until the spring of 1938 .
originally , he planned to write a story in which bilbo had used up all his treasure and was looking for another adventure to gain more .
writing was slow , because tolkien had a full-time academic position , and needed to earn more money as a university examiner .
tolkien stopped " the lord of the rings " during most of 1943 and only restarted it in april 1944 .
tolkien made another great effort in 1946 , and showed the manuscript to his publishers in 1947 .
the story was finished the next year , but tolkien did not complete the rest of the work until 1949 .
the first manuscripts , which total 9,250 pages , now are in the j . r . tolkien collection at marquette university .
the influence of the welsh language , which tolkien had learned , is summarized in his essay english and welsh : " if i may once more refer to my work .
the lord of the rings was a very important symbol in the story .
this element in the tale has given perhaps more pleasure to more readers than anything else in it .
tolkien wrote that " the lord of the rings is of course a fundamentally religious and catholic work .
that is why i have not put in , or have cut out , practically all references to religion , to cults or practices , in the imaginary world .
for the religious element is absorbed into the story and the symbolism .
some locations and characters were inspired by tolkien 's childhood in birmingham , where he first lived near sarehole mill , and later near edgbaston reservoir .
it has also been suggested that the shire and its surroundings were based on the countryside around stonyhurst college in lancashire where tolkien frequently stayed during the 1940s .
the work was influenced by the effects of his military service during world war i .
the book was offered to collins in 1950 .
tolkien intended " the silmarillion " at this point showed that it was not enough to be published .
after milton waldman , his contact at collins , expressed the belief that " the lord of the rings " itself wanted cutting , tolkien eventually demanded that they publish the book in 1952 .
for publication , the book was divided into three volumes .
" the return of the king " was especially delayed due to tolkien revising the ending and preparing appendicesicesicesices which had to be left out because of space constraints .
tolkien did not like the title " the return of the king " , believing it gave away too much of the storyline , but he refused to give it to his publisher 's preference .
he suggested the title " the two towers " in a deliberately ambiguous attempt to link the unconnected books iii and iv .
because the three-volume binding was so widely distributed , the work is often referred to as the " lord of the rings " trilogy .
tolkien made use of the term " trilogy " for the work though he did at other times consider this incorrect , as it was written and conceived as a single book .
the books were published under a profit-sharing agreement , which tolkien would not get an advance or royalties until the books had broken even , after which he would take a large share of the profits .
in the early 1960s donald a . wollheim , science fiction editor of the paperback publisher ace books , said that " the lord of the rings " was not protected in the united states under american copyright law because houghton mifflin , the us hardcover publisher , had neglected to copyright the work in the united states .
grass-roots pressure from these fans became so great that ace books withdrew their edition and made a nominal payment to tolkien .
tolkien wrote several textual revisions to produce a version of the book that would be published with his consent and establish an unquestioned us copyright .
this was the second edition of " the lord of the rings " , published in 1965 .
the first ballantine paperback edition was printed in october that year .
houghton mifflin editions after 1994 make more changes to tolkien , and corrections supervised by christopher tolkien , which resulted , after some initial glitches , in a computer-based unified text .
in 2004 , for the 50th anniversary edition , wayne g . hammond and christina scull , under supervision from christopher tolkien , studied and revised the text to eliminate as many errors and inconsistencies as possible .
several editions , notably the 50th anniversary edition , combine all three books into one book .
from 1988 to 1992 christopher tolkien published the surviving drafts of " the lord of the rings " , chronicling and illuminating with commentary the stages of the text 's development , in volumes 6 – 9 of his history of middle-earth series .
the novel has been translated into many languages .
tolkien , an expert in philology , examined many of these translations , and made comments on each that reflect both the translation process and his work .
tolkien wrote a " guide to the names in the lord of the rings " .
tolkien suggested that the english language for the westron of the original , the english language of the westmarch , was the same as the english translation of the westron .
reviews in many media have been , on the whole , highly positive and acknowledge tolkien 's literary achievement as a significant one .
the " sunday telegraph " described it as " among the greatest works of imaginative fiction of the twentieth century " .
the " new york herald tribune " also seemed to have an idea of how popular the books would become .
w . h . auden , an admirer of tolkien 's writings , regarded " the lord of the rings " as a " masterpiece " , further stating that in some cases it outdid the achievement of john milton 's " paradise lost " .
" new york times " reviewer judith shulevitz said that tolkien 's " a high-minded belief in the importance of his mission as a literary preservationist , which turns out to be death to literature itself " .
another inkling , c . s . lewis , had very different feelings , writing , " here are beauties which pierce like swords or burn like cold iron .
despite these reviews and its lack of paperback printing until the 1960s , " the lord of the rings " sold well in hardback .
despite its many detractors , the publication of ace books and ballantine paperbacks helped " the lord of the rings " become very popular in the united states in the 1960s .
the book has remained so ever since .
in 1999 , poll of amazon . com customers , " the lord of the rings " was judged to be their favourite " book of the millennium " .
tolkien said that the one ring was not an allegory for the atomic bomb , nor were his works a strict allegory of any kind , but were open to interpretation as the reader saw fit .
a few critics have found what they consider racial elements in the story .
counter-arguments note that race-focused critiques often omit relevant textual evidence , cite imagery from adaptations rather than the work itself , ignore the absence of evidence of racist attitudes or events in the author 's personal life , and claim that the perception of racism is itself a marginal view .
in " the two towers " , the character samwise sees a fallen foe .
director peter jackson considers sam in the director 's commentary of the scene .
these sentiments , jackson argues , were derived from tolkien 's experience in the great war and found their way into his writings to show the evils of war itself , not of other races .
critics have also seen social class rather than race as being the determining factor in the portrayal of good and evil .
commentators such as science fiction author david brin have interpreted the work to hold devotion to a traditional elitist social structure .
in his essay " epic pooh " , science fiction and fantasy author michael moorcock critiques the world-view displayed by the book as deeply conservative , in both the " paternalism " of the narrative voice and the power-structures in the narrative .
tom shippey cites the origin of this portrayal of evil as a reflection of the prejudices of european middle-classes during the inter-war years towards the industrial working class .
" the lord of the rings " has been made into movies , radio and stage .
a 1979 dramatization of " the lord of the rings " was shown in the united states and subsequently issued on tape and cd .
following j . r . tolkien 's sale of the movie rights for " the lord of the rings " to united artists in 1969 , rock band the beatles considered a corresponding movie project and approached stanley kubrick as a potential director .
the eventual director of the movie adaptation peter jackson further explained that a major hindrance to the project 's progression was tolkien 's opposition to the beatles .
a three-issue comic book version of the movie was also published in europe but not printed in english illustrations .
when bakshi 's investors got away of financing the second movie that would complete the story , the rest of the story was covered in an animated television special by rankin-bass .
the final instalment of this trilogy was the second movie to break the one-billion dollar barrier .
" the hunt for gollum " was released on the internet in may 2009 .
" born of hope " is a fan movie .
amazon acquired the global television rights to " the lord of the rings " in november 2017 .
the series will not be a direct adaptation of the books , but will instead introduce new stories that are set before " the fellowship of the ring " .
in 1990 , recorded books published an audio version of " the lord of the rings " , with british actor rob inglis .
the genre flowered throughout the 1960s .
lin carter called the single most cold-blooded , complete rip-off of another book that i have ever read .
dungeons & dragons , which popularized the role-playing gamemlearearearearearearearear genre in the 1970s , features many races found in " the lord of the rings " .
gary gygax , the lead designer of the game , said that he was influenced by " the lord of the rings " , stating that he included these elements as a marketing move to draw on the popularity the work enjoyed at the time he was developing the game .
the " lord of the rings " is very similar to many of the games .
research also suggests that some people who use fantasy games have tried to create an epic fantasy story .
swann is best known for his collaboration with michael flanders as flanders & swann , set six poems from " the lord of the rings " and one from " the adventures of tom bombadil "arth to music .
swann met with tolkien to play the songs for his approval .
the songs were published in 1967 as " the road goes ever on : a song cycle " .
rock bands of the 1970s were musically and lyrically inspired by the fantasy embracing counter-culture of the time ; british 70s rock band led zeppelin recorded several songs that contain references to " the lord of the rings " , such as gollum in " ramble on " , the misty mountains in " misty mountain hop " , and ringwraiths in the battle of evermore .
in 1970 , the swedish musician bo hansson released an instrumental concept album based on the book titled " sagan om ringen " .
the album was released internationally as " music inspired by lord of the rings " in 1972 .
styx also made homage to tolkien on their album " pieces of eight " with the song " lords of the ring " .
progressive rock group camel paid homage to the text in their lengthy composition " nimrodel / the procession / the white rider " , and progressive rock band barclay harvest was inspired by the character galadriel to write a song by that name .
later , from the 1980s to the present day , many heavy metal acts have been influenced by tolkien .
summoning 's music is based upon tolkien .
the finnish metal band nightwish also uses tolkien 's lyrics to describe them .
eichenschild is named for thorin oakenshield , a character in " the hobbit " , and naturally has a number of tolkien themed songs .
the danish ensemble have released a number of albums that feature the complete poems and songs of " the lord of the rings " set to music , with some featuring recitation by christopher lee .
and " gandalf for president " were two phrases popular amongst united states tolkien fans during this time .
episode " the return of the bling " shows the work 's continual presence in popular culture .
tolkien sold the merchandising rights to " the lord of the rings "arth and " the hobbit " according to the agreement .
after three years after the author 's death , united artists sold the rights to saul zaentz company , who now trade as tolkien enterprises .
since then all " authorized " merchandise has been signed-off by tolkien enterprises .
outside any commercial use from adaptations , from the late 1960s onwards there has been a lot of original licensed merchandise .
recent examples include the spiel des jahres award-winning snort for " best use of literature in a game " .
the song " the lord of the rings " has been mentioned in numerous songs including " the ballad of bilbo baggins " by leonard nimoy , led zeppelin 's " misty mountain hop " , " over the hills and far away " , " ramble on " , and " the battle of evermore " .
in 1970 , he formed a band called shagrat .
