gradualism is a hypothesis that changes gradually or that changes happens over time as opposed to in large steps .
uniformitarianism is a term that describes a number of different ideas .
in the natural sciences , gradualism is the theory which profound change is the product of slow but continuous processes .
the theory was proposed in 1795 by james hutton , a scottish geologist .
they formed the basis of early evolutionary theory .
charles darwin was influenced by lyell 's " principles of geology " , which explained both uniformitarian methodology and theory .
using uniformitarianism , which states that onedilly make an appeal to any force or phenomenon which shall presently be observed observed observed observed observe .
gradualism is often confused with the idea of phyletic gradualism .
it is a term coined by stephen jay gould and niles eldredge to contrast with their model of punctuated equilibrium , which is gradualist itself , but argues that most evolution is marked by long periods of evolutionary stability — punctuated by rare instances of branching evolution .
phyletic gradualism is a model of evolution .
when evolution occurs in this mode , it is usually by changing the species into a new one zagreb .
in this view no clear line of demarcation exists between an ancestral species and a descendant species , unless splitting occurs .
punctuated gradualism is a hypothesis that refers to a species that has " relative stasis over a considerable part of its total duration .
it is one of the three common models of evolution .
while the traditional model of palaeontology , the phylogenetic model says that features evolved slowly without any direct association with speciation , the relatively newer and more controversial idea of punctuated equilibrium claims that major evolutionary changes can ' t happen over a gradual period but in localized , rare , rapid events of branching speciation .
punctuated gradualism is a variation of these models , between the phyletic gradualism model and the punctuated equilibrium model .
it states that speciation is not needed for a lineage to rapidly evolve from one equilibrium to another , but may show rapid transitions between long-stable states .
it is the opposite of revolutions , such as revolutions .
gradualism is one of the defining features of political liberalism and reformism .
machiavellian politics pushes politicians to get rid of the movement .
in socialist politics and within the socialist movement , the idea of gradualism is different from reformism .
it is most commonly associated with the libertarian socialist concept of dual power .
martin luther king , jr . was opposed to the idea of gradualism as a method of eliminating segregation .
in linguistics , language change is seen as gradual , the product of chain reactions and subject to cyclic drift .
the view that creole languages are the product of catastrophism is disputed .
gradualism is the approach of some schools of buddhism and other eastern philosophies .
the opposite approach is subitism .
the debate on the issue was very important to the history of zen , which rejected gradualism , and to the establishment of the opposite approach within the tibetan buddhism , after the debate of samye .
it was continued in other schools of indian and chinese philosophy .
contradictorial gradualism is the treatment of fuzziness developed by lorenzo pena .
gradualism in social change implemented through reformist means is a moral principle to which the fabian society is committed .
reformism is the idea that gradual changes through and within existing institutions can ultimately change a society 's fundamental economic system and political structures .
that idea of social change grew out of opposition to revolutionary socialism .
in the terminology of nwo-related speculations , gradualism refers to the gradual implementation of a totalitarian world government .
