in the natural sciences , gradualism is the theory which profound change is the product of slow but continuous processes .
charles darwin was influenced by lyell 's " principles of geology " , which explained both uniformitarian methodology and theory .
gradualism is often confused with the idea of phyletic gradualism .
it is a term coined by stephen jay gould and niles eldredge to contrast with their model of punctuated equilibrium , which is gradualist itself , but argues that most evolution is marked by long periods of evolutionary stability — punctuated by rare instances of branching evolution .
when evolution occurs in this mode , it is usually by changing the species into a new one zagreb .
punctuated gradualism is a hypothesis that refers to a species that has " relative stasis over a considerable part of its total duration .
it is one of the three common models of evolution .
while the traditional model of palaeontology , the phylogenetic model says that features evolved slowly without any direct association with speciation , the relatively newer and more controversial idea of punctuated equilibrium claims that major evolutionary changes can ' t happen over a gradual period but in localized , rare , rapid events of branching speciation .
punctuated gradualism is a variation of these models , between the phyletic gradualism model and the punctuated equilibrium model .
it states that speciation is not needed for a lineage to rapidly evolve from one equilibrium to another , but may show rapid transitions between long-stable states .
it is the opposite of revolutions , such as revolutions .
machiavellian politics pushes politicians to get rid of the movement .
in socialist politics and within the socialist movement , the idea of gradualism is different from reformism .
martin luther king , jr . was opposed to the idea of gradualism as a method of eliminating segregation .
the view that creole languages are the product of catastrophism is disputed .
gradualism in social change implemented through reformist means is a moral principle to which the fabian society is committed .
reformism is the idea that gradual changes through and within existing institutions can ultimately change a society 's fundamental economic system and political structures .
that idea of social change grew out of opposition to revolutionary socialism .