british railways ( br ) was the state-owned company that operated most of the overground rail transport in great britain between 1948 and 1997 .
it was formed from the nationalisation of the " big four " british railway companies .
it became an independent statutory corporation in 1962 .
the period of nationalisation saw sweeping changes in the national railway network .
by 1968 steam locomotion had been entirely replaced by diesel and electric traction , except for the vale of rheidol railway trunks .
passengers replaced freight as the main source of business .
on privatisation , responsibility for track , signalling and stations was transferred to railtrack× .
the " double arrow " logo is made of two interlocked arrows showing the direction of travel on a double track railway .
it is now employed as a generic symbol on street signs in great britain denoting railway stations .
the rail transport system in great britain developed during the 19th century .
after the grouping of 1923 under the railways act 1921 , there were four large railway companies .
during world war i the railways were under state control .
complete nationalisation had been considered , and the railways act 1921 is sometimes considered as a precursor to that , but the concept was rejected .
nationalisation was carried out after world war ii .
this act made provision for the nationalisation of the network , as part of a policy of nationalising public services by clement attlee 's labour government .
british railways came into existence as the business name of the railway executive of the british transport commission dq btc <s> on 1 january 1948 .
there were also joint railways between the big four and a few light railways to consider constituents constituents .
excluded from nationalisation were industrial lines like the oxfordshire ironstone railway .
the london underground-owned the london underground -lrb- 1933 – 1933 -rrb- was also nationalised , becoming the london transport executive of the british transport commission .
the bicester military railway was already run by the government .
the electric liverpool overhead railway was also excluded from nationalisation .
the railway executive was conscious that some lines on the buddha 's network were unprofitable and hard to justify socially , and a programme of closures began almost immediately after nationalisation .
however , the general financial position of br became gradually poorer , until an operating loss was recorded in 1955 .
the executive itself had been abolished in 1953 by the conservative government , and control of br changed to the parent commission .
other changes to the british transport commission at the same time included the return of road haulage to the private sector .
later , several lines were transferred between regions .
these included the former great central lines from the eastern region to the london midland region , and the west of england main line from the southern region to western region .
the north eastern region was merged with the eastern region in 1967 .
in 1982 the regions were abolished and replaced by " business sectors " , a process known as sectorisation .
the anglia region was created in 1987 , its first general manager was john edmonds , who began his appointment on 19 october 1987 .
the eastern region was separated from the eastern region on 29 april 1988 .
its western boundary is hertford east , meldreth and whittlesea .
the report was published in january 1955 .
it was planned to bring the railway system into the 20th century .
a government white paper produced in 1956 stated that modernisation would help eliminate br 's financial deficit by 1962 .
the aim was to increase speed , reliability , safety , and line capacity .
the government appeared to endorse the 1955 programme costing £ . 2 billiondilly , but did so largely for political reasons .
this included the withdrawal of steam traction and its replacement by dieselmorphism and some electric locomotives .
not all the modernisations would be effective at reducing costs .
the dieselisation programme gave contracts primarily to british builders , who had limited experience of diesel locomotive manufacture , and rushed commissioning based on an expectation of rapid electrification .
at the same time , containerised freight was being made .
the marshalling yard building programme was a failure .
a 2002 documentary broadcast on bbc radio four blamed the 1950s decisions for the " beleaguered " condition of the railway system at that time .
during the late 1950s , railway finances continued to worsen .
a new paper was made by the transport act 1962 .
this abolished the commission and replaced it by several separate boards .
the british railways board took over on 1 january 1963 .
then it became the first chairman of the british railways board .
a major traffic census in april 1961 was used in the compilation of a report on the future of the network .
this report was published by the british railways in march 1963 .
the proposals became known as the " beeching axe " , were dramatic .
a third of all passenger services and more than 4,000 of the 7,000 stations would be closed .
beeching , who is thought to have been the author of most of the report , made some dire figures .
only one third of the network was carrying just 1 % of the traffic .
of the 18,000 passenger coaches , 6,000 were said to be used only 18 times a year or less .
although maintaining them cost betweenhosh and £4m a year , they earned only about £0.5m .
most of the closures were carried out between 1963 and 1970 .
the closures were heavily criticised at the time , and continue to be controversial .
a small number of stations and lines closed under the beeching programme have been reopened , with further reopenings proposed .
a second beeching report , " the development of the major trunk routes " , followed in 1965 .
this did not recommend closures as such , but outlined a " network for development " .
the fate of the rest of the network was not discussed in the report .
the basis for calculating passenger fares changed in 1964 .
fares on some routes would be set at a higher level than on other routes .
passenger levels decreased from 1962 to the late 1970s .
electrification of the great eastern main line from london to norwich between 1976 and 1986 and the east coast main line from london to edinburgh between 1985 and 1990 .
passenger service ceased in 1970 and goods in 1981 .
the 1980s and 1990s saw the closure of some railways which had survived the beeching axe a generation earlier , but which had seen passenger services withdrawn .
this included the chester and connah 's quay railway in 1992 , the brierley hill to walsall section of the south staffordshire line in 1993 , while the birmingham to wolverhampton section of the great western railway was closed in three phases between 1972 and 1992 .
a further british rail report was published in 1983 .
the serpell report made no recommendations , but did set out various options for the network .
this report was not welcomed , and the government decided to quietly leave it on the shelf .
br was gradually reorganised , with the regional structure finally being abolished and replaced with business-led sectors .
this process , known as " sectorisation " , led to far greater customer focus , but was cut short in 1994 with the splitting up of br for privatisation .
in 1986 , three passenger sectors were made : intercity , operating principal express services ; london & south east reeling renamed network southeast in 1986 c1 .
in the metropolitan counties local services were managed by the passenger transport executives .
provincial was the most subsidised gallon per passenger km foley of the three sectors ; upon formation , its costs were four times its revenue .
during the 1980s british rail ran the rail riders club .
british railways was such a large operation , running not just railways but also ferries , steamships and hotels , but it has been considered difficult to analyse the effects of nationalisation .
prices rose quickly in this period , rising 108 % in real terms from 1979 to 1994 , as prices rose by 262 % but rpi only increased by 154 % in the same time .
following nationalisation in 1948 , british railways began to adapt the corporate liveries on the rolling stock it had inherited from its predecessor railway companies .
initially , an express blue colour was used on passenger locomotives , and lnwr-style lined black for mixed-traffic locomotives , but later green was more widely adopted .
the development of a corporate identity for the organisation was hampered by the competing ambitions of the british transport commission and the railway executive .
the executive attempted to introduce a modern , curved logo which could also be the standard for station signage totems .
because of its similarity to a hot dog , it became known as the " flying sausage " .
the btc 's name was changed to the common branding of the btc as its first corporate logo .
the sausage logo was used for station signs across great britain .
in 1956 , the btc was granted a heraldic achievement by the college of arms and the lord lyon .
the br 's second corporate logo was designed in consultation with charles franklyn .
this emblem soon got the nickname of the " ferret and dartboard " .
a new version of the logo with the name in a circle was also used on locomotives .
the zeal for modernisation in the beeching era drove the next rebranding exercise .
br 's design panel set up a working party led by milner gray of the design research unit .
they created a corporate identity manual , which established a coherent brand and design standard for the whole organisation .
it was designed by gerald barneyacker , also of the druvial .
it was also got a nickname : " the arrow of indecision " .
a mirror image of the double arrow was used on the port side of the sealink ferry funnels .
the brand name of the organisation was truncated to " british rail " .
the uniformity of br branding continued until the process of sectorisation was introduced in the 1980s .
certain br operations such as inter-city , network southeast or railfreight began to adopt their own identities .
eventually , as sectorisation developed into a prelude to privatisation , the unified british rail brand disappeared .
the br corporate identity manual is noted as a piece of british design history .
despite its nationalisation in 1947 " as one of the ' commanding heights ' of the economy " , according to some sources british rail was not profitable for mostoked if not all bing of its history .
newspapers reported that as recently as the 1990s , public rail cost was counted as profit ; as early as 1961 , british railways were losingsmith , 000 a day .
british rail 's profitability was questioned .
although the company was considered the sole public-transport option in many areas , the beeching cuts made buses the only public transport available in some rural areas .
despite increasing in traffic congestion and fuel prices beginning to rise in the 1990s , british rail remained unprofitable .
after sectorisation , intercity became profitable .
this sector became the first long distance passenger railway in the uk to go into profit .
it became one of britain 's top 150 companies with city centre .
in 1979 the conservative government led by margaret thatcher was viewed as anti-railway .
however , british rail was allowed to spend its own money with government approval .
this led to a number of electrification projects being given the go-ahead , including the east coast main line , the spur from doncaster to leeds , and the lines in east anglia out of london liverpool street to norwich and king 's lynn .
in the southwest , the line from bournemouth to weymouth was electrified with 750 v dc 3rd rail electrification in the south .
in 1988 the line to aberdare was opened again .
a british rail advertisement called " britain 's railway " was shown at the forth rail bridge , the royal albert bridge , glenfinnan viaduct and london paddington station .
a new station was constructed at stansted airport in 1991 .
the following year , the maesteg line was reopened .
in 1988 , the windsor link line , greater manchester was built and has proven to be an important piece of infrastructure .
in 1989 the narrow gauge vale of rheidol railway was preserved , becoming the first part of british rail to be privatised .
british rail was privatised by the end of the 1990s .
the track and infrastructure was passed to railtrack on 1 april 1994 .
the freight services were sold to six companies .
the waterloo & city line was part of the privatisation and was transferred to london underground in december 1994 .
the remaining obligations of british rail were transferred to brb reeling residuaryuaryuaryuary limited .
the privatisation , proposed by the conservative government in 1992 , was opposed by the labour party and the rail unions .
the new labour manifesto of 1997 did not want to privatise the london underground .
rail unions have historically opposed privatisation , but former associated society of locomotive engineers and firemen general secretary lew adams moved to work for virgin trains .
there are more trains in the trade union , more train drivers , and more trains running .
we ’ ve protected jobs , and we got more jobs .
the former br network , with the trunk routes of the west coast main line , east coast main line , great western main line , midland main line , and other lines .
the narrow gauge vale of rheidol railway in ceredigion , wales became part of british railways at nationalisation .
although built as a working railway , in 1948 the line was mainly a tourist attraction .
the line was operated by steam locomotives , long after the withdrawal of standard gauge steam .
the line 's three steam locomotives were the only one to receive tops serial numbers and be painted in br rail blue livery with the double arrow logo .
the vale of rheidol railway was taken over in 1989 and continues to operate as a private heritage railway .
other preserved lines , or heritage railways , have reopened lines previously closed by british rail .
these range from picturesque rural branch lines like the keighley and worth valley railway to parts of mainline such as the great central railway .
many have links to the national rail network , both at station interchanges , for example the severn valley railway between kidderminster and kidderminster town , and physical rail connections like the watercress line at alton .
most are operated solely as leisure facilities some also provide educational resources .
british railways operated ships from its formation in 1948 on several routes .
many ships were acquired on nationalisation , and others were built for operation by british railways or its later subsidiary , sealink .
those ships could carry rail vehicles were class 99 .
sealink was a ferry company based in the united kingdom from 1970 to 1984 .
the joint hovercraft services of british railisar limitedrail under british rail hovercraft limited owns the french sncf .
the hovercraft limited was established in 1965 .
the ship was launched in 1968 from dover , england to calais and boulogne-sur-mer .
a family of railway carriages , designed and built by british rail workshops aarhus from 1969 british rail engineering limited limited limited turnout breldilly between 1964 and 1975 .
they were of steel construction .
many remain in service to this day .
the advanced passenger train operator aptedge -lrb- als -rrb- was a tilting high speed train developed by british rail during the 1970s and early 1980s .
notable among many technical advancements was the active tilting system .
the intercity 125 was and is a high speed diesel train that is widely credited with saving british rail and is usually called hst .
it was introduced by british rail in the early 1970s .
under the privatisation process , operations were split into more than 100 companies .
the ownership of the infrastructure of the railway system was taken over by railtrack .
the telecomms infrastructure and british rail telecommunications was sold to racal .
the rolling stock was transferred to three private roscos crumpled rolling stock companies companiesxt .
passenger services were divided into 25 operating companies , which were let on a franchise basis for a set period .
dozens of smaller engineering and maintenance companies were also made and sold off .
the final train that the company operated was a railfreight distribution goods train in autumn 1997 .
the british railways board continued in existence as a corporation until early 2001 , when it was replaced with the strategic rail authority .
since privatisation , the number of companies has changed several times as franchises have been re-let and the areas covered by franchises restructured .
since privatisation , many groups have campaigned for the renationalisation of british rail , most notably ' bring back british rail ' .
some people also have views on the privatisation of british rail .
the renation of the railways of britain continues to have popular support .
polls in 2012 and 2013 showed 70 % and 66 % support for renationalisation .
due to rail franchises lasting sometimes over a decade , full renationalisation would take years unless compensation was paid to terminate contracts early .
the labour government set up the not-for-dividend company network rail to take over duties rather than renationalise this part of the network .
however , in september 2014 , network rail was reclassified as a central government body .
the office of the esa was asked to make the changes to the esa 10 .
the green party has said that the railways ' back into public ownership ' .
in 2016 , the green mp , caroline lucas , said that the rail network would fall back into public ownership step by step .
under jeremy corbyn , the labour party has promised to gradually renationalise british rail franchises if elected , as and when their private contracts expire , creating a " people 's railway " .
in 1989 , the itv sketch show " spitting image " parodyied hudson 's 1988 " british rail , britain 's railway " advert on the plans of the then conservative british government to privatise the railways featuring many of the show 's puppets representing many of the show 's puppets posing including the portrayal of former prime minister margaret thatcher , numerous trains and landmarks and even a cutout of thomas brey .
