romantic music is a type of music in the romantic period .
romanticism is the intellectual , artistic and literary movement that became prominent in western europe from approximately 1800 until 1850 .
romantic composers sought to create music that was individualistic , emotional , dramatic and often programmatic .
romantic music was often ostensibly inspired bykovsky or else sought to evokeokeoke complement non-musical stimuli , such as nature , literature , poetry or the plastic arts .
some of the early romantic composers of the early romantic era include franz schubert , franz schubert , felix mendelssohn , john field , gioachino rossini , vincenzo bellini , giacomo meyerbeer , robert schumann , hector berlioz , franz liszt , and richard wagner .
later , the 19th century composers would seem to be able to build upon certain early romantic ideas and musical techniques , such as the use of extended chromatic harmony and orchestration .
some of the romantic composers who later became romantic composers were : bruckner , brahms , tchaikovsky , mahler , richard strauss , puccini , sibelius , elgar , faure , rachmaninoff and franck .
the romantic movement was an artistic , literary , and intellectual movement .
it was a revolt against social and political ideas of the age of enlightenment .
it was influenced by developments in natural history .
one of the first important use of the term to music was in 1789 , in the " memoires " by the frenchman andre gretry , but it was e . t . a . hoffmann who really established the principles of musical romanticism , in a lengthy review of ludwig van beethoven 's fifth symphony published in 1810 , and in 1813 in an article on beethoven 's music .
in the first of these essays he traced the beginnings of musical romanticism to the later works of haydn and mozart .
it was hoffmann 's fusion of ideas already associated with the term " romantic " , used in opposition to the restraint and formality of classical models , that elevated music , and especially instrumental music , to a position of pre-eminence in romanticism as the art most suited to the expression of emotions .
it was also through the writings of hoffmann and other german authors that german music was brought to the centre of musical romanticism .
these lists , however , proliferated over time , resulted in a " chaos of antithetical phenomena " , criticized for their superficiality and signifying so many different things that there came to be no central meaning .
the attributes were also criticized for being too vague .
for example , features of the " ghostly and supernatural " could apply equally to mozart 's " don giovanni " from 1787 and stravinsky 's " the rake 's progress " from 1951 .
in music there is a clear dividing line in musical structure and form following the death of beethoven .
whether one counts beethoven as a “ romantic ” composer or not , the breadth and power of his work gave rise to a feeling that the classical sonata form and , indeed , the structure of the symphony , sonata and string quartet had been exhausted .
schumann , schubert , berlioz and other early romantic composers were looking in different directions .
events and changes in society such as ideas , attitudes , discoveries , inventions , and historical events often affect music .
for example , the industrial revolution was in full effect by the late 18th century and early 19th century .
this event had a big effect on music : there were major improvements in the mechanical valves and keys that most woodwinds and brass instruments depend on .
the new and innovative instruments could be played with greater ease and they were reliable .
another development that had an effect on music was the rise of the middle class .
composers before this period lived on the patronage of the aristocracy .
many times their audience was small , composed mostly of the upper class and people who knew about music .
they often wrote for public concerts and festivals .
composers of the romantic era , like elgar , showed that there should be “ no segregation of musical tastes ” and that the “ purpose was to write music that was to be heard ” .
during the romantic period , music often took on a much more nationalistic purpose .
for example , jean sibelius ' " finlandia " represents the rising nation of finland .
frederic chopin was one of the first composers to use nationalistic elements into his compositions .
joseph machlis states , " poland 's struggle for freedom from tsarist rule aroused the national poet in poland .
examples of musical nationalism abound in the output of the romantic era .
the idiom is used in the mazurkas of chopin .
his mazurkas and polonaises are particularly notable for their use of nationalistic rhythms .
during world war ii the nazis forbade the playing of . . chopin 's polonaises in warsaw because of the powerful symbolism in these works .
other composers , such as bedrich smetana , wrote pieces that musically described their homelands .
smetana also composed eight nationalist operas , all of which remain in the repertory .
he was the first czech nationalist composer and the most important czech opera composer of the generation who came to prominence in the 1860s .
