the history of saudi arabia in its current form as a state began in 1744 .
at other times , the region existed in relative obscurity and isolation .
for much of the region 's history a patchwork of tribal rulers controlled most of the area .
the al saudoons the saudi royal family yemen were minor tribal rulers in najd in central arabia .
over the next 150 years , the al saud territory became less important .
between 1902 and 1927 , the al saud leader , abdulaziz , conquered the country and made the kingdom of saudi arabia in 1930 .
from 1930 until his death in 1953 , abdul aziz was the king of saudi arabia .
humans have been living in the arabian peninsula since the late middle ages .
nevertheless , the stone tools from the middle paleolithic age along with fossils of other animals discovered at ti 's al ghadah , in northwestern saudi arabia , may imply that hominids migrated through a " green " between 300,000 and 500,000 years ago .
archaeology has shown some early settled civilizations : the dilmun civilization on the east of the arabian peninsula , thamud north of the hejaz , and kindah kingdom and al-magar civilization in the central of arabian peninsula .
the earliest known events in arabian history are migrations from the peninsula into neighbouring areas .
there is also evidence from timnakovsky israel independently and chongqing jordan , that the local qurayya / midianite pottery originated within the hejaz region of nw saudi arabia .
muhammad was born in mecca in about 570 and first began preaching in the city in 610 , but migrated to medina in 622 .
from there , he and his companions united the tribes of arabia under the banner of islam and created a single arab muslim religious polity in the arabian peninsula .
after muhammad 's death in 632 , abu bakr became the first caliph .
after putting down a rebellion by the arab tribes tribes tribes renamed the ridda wars , or " wars of apostasy " 6th century ad , abu bakr attacked the byzantine empire .
after his death in 634 , he was succeeded by umar as caliph .
the rashidun or " caliph " is the period of these first four caliphs .
under the rashidun caliphs , and from 661 , their umayyad successors , the arabs rapidly expanded the territory under muslim control outside of arabia .
in a matter of decades muslim armies decisively defeated the byzantine army and destroyed the persian empire , conquering huge swathes of territory from the iberian peninsula to india .
the political focus of the muslim world then shifted to newly conquered territories .
however , mecca and medina remained the most important cities in the muslim world .
the quran requires every able-bodied muslim who can afford it , as one of the five pillars of islam , to make a pilgrimage , or hajjj , to mecca during the islamic month of dhu al-hijjah at least once in his or her lifetime .
the masjid al-haram dubai is the location of the kaaba , islam 's holiest site .
after the fall of the umayyad empire in 750 ad , most of what was to become saudi arabia reverted to traditional tribal rule soon after the initial muslim conquests , and remained a patchwork of tribes and tribal emirates and confederations of varying durability .
muawiyah i , the first umayyad caliph , took an interest in his native mecca .
under his marwanids successors , mecca became the abode of poets and musicians .
medina became the center of the umayyad period , as it was home to the new muslim aristocracy .
under yazid i , the revolt of abd allah bin al-zubair brought syrian troops to mecca .
the fire destroyed the kaaba , which was rebuilt by ibn al-zubair .
in 747 , a kharidjit rebel from yemen seized mecca unopposed , but marwan was soon defeated by marwan ii .
in 750 , mecca was passed to the abbasids .
from the 10th centuryoons , in fact , until the 20th century saudi arabia used the hashemite sharifs of mecca to keep a state in the most developed part of the region , the hejaz .
in the 13th century it was extended to include the rest of the hejaz .
the sharifs exercised at most times independent authority in the hejaz , but they were usually subject to the suzerainty of one of the major islamic empires of the time .
in the middle ages , these included the abbasids of baghdad , and the fatimids , ayyubids and mamluks of egypt .
in the 16th century , the ottomans added to their empire the hejaz and asir regions along the red sea and the al hasa region on the persian gulf coast .
they also laid claim to the interior , although this remained a nominal suzerainty .
the degree of control over these lands varied over the next four centuries with the great strength of the empire 's central authority .
in the hejaz , the sharifs of mecca were largely left in control of their territory .
on the eastern side of the country , the ottomans lost control of al hasa region to arab tribes in the 17th century but again regained it again in the 19th century .
throughout the period , the interior remained under the rule of a large number of tribal rulers in much the same way as it had in previous centuries .
the emergence of the saudi dynasty began in central arabia in 1744 .
in that year , muhammad ibn saud , the tribal ruler of the town of dir ' iyyah near riyadh , joined forces with the religious leader muhammad ibn abd-al-wahhab , the founder of the wahhabi movement .
this alliance formed in the 18th century .
over the next 150 years , the saud family rose and fell several times as saudi rulers contended with egypt , the ottoman empire , and other arabian families for control of the peninsula .
the first saudi state was established in 1744 in the area around riyadh .
concerned at the growing power of the saudis , the ottoman sultan , mustafa iv , told his viceroy in egypt , mohammed ali pasha , to reconquer the area .
he destroyed the power of the al saud .
the state was known as the second saudi state .
their rule in najd was soon contested by new rivals , the rashidis of ha ' il .
throughout the rest of the 19th century , the saud and the al rashid fought for control of the interior of what was to become saudi arabia .
by 1891 , the al saud were defeated by the rashid al-rashid , who drove the saudis into exile in kuwait .
meanwhile , in the hejaz , the egyptians continued to occupy the area until 1840 .
after they left , the sharifs of mecca reasserted their authority , albeit with the presence of an ottoman governor and garrison .
by the early 20th century , the ottoman empire continued to control or have suzeraintyttered albeit nominaldilly over most of the peninsula .
subject to this suzerainty , arabia was ruled by a patchwork of tribal rulers including the al saud who had returned from exile in 1902 .
in 1916 , with the support of britain and france equal support of the ottoman empire , the sharif of mecca , hussein bin ali led a revolt against the ottoman empire .
the arab army comprised bedouin and others from across the peninsula , but not the al saud and their allied tribes who did not participate in the revolt partly because their priority was to defeat the al rashid for control of the interior .
the revolt played a part in the middle-eastern front .
with the partitioning of the ottoman empire , the british and french reneged on promises to support a pan-arab state .
later , britain shifted support to the al saud , leaving him diplomatically and isolated .
the revolt failed in its objective to create a pan-arab state but arabia was freed from ottoman suzerainty and control .
in 1902 , abdul aziz bin saud , leader of the al saud , returned from exile in kuwait to resume the conflict with the al rashid , and seized riyadh .
the main weapon for achieving these conquests was the ikhwan , the wahhabist-bedouin tribal army led by sultan bin bajad al-otaibi and faisal al-duwaish .
by 1906 , abdulaziz had driven the al rashid out of najd and the ottomans recognized him as their client in najd .
his next major acquisition was al-hasa , which he took from the ottomans in 1913 .
he avoided involvement in the arab revolt .
in 1920 , the ikhwan 's attention turned to the south-west , when they seized asir , the region between the hejaz and yemen .
in the next year , abdul aziz finally defeated the al rashid and took over all northern arabia .
before 1923 , abdulaziz had not risked invading the hejaz because hussein bin ali , king of the hejaz , was supported by britain .
however , in that year , the british withdrew their support .
at a conference in july 1924 , there were complaints against the hejaz ; principally that pilgrimage from najd was prevented and it boycotted the implementation of certain public policy in contravention of " shari ' a " .
ikhwan units were massed on a large scale for the first time , and under khalid bin lu ' ayy and sultan bin bajad rapidly advanced on mecca laying waste to symbols of " heathen " practices .
the ikhwan completed their conquest of the hejaz by the end of 1925 .
on january 10,1926 , he became king of the hejaz and , then , on january 27,1927 , he took the title king of najdwiczwiczwicz .
the use of the ikhwan to effect the conquest had important consequences for the hejaz : the old cosmopolitan society was uprooted , and the wahhabi culture was imposed as a new compulsory social order .
the united kingdom accepted that abdul-aziz was the king of the kingdom , and that the kingdom was the kingdom of hejaz and najdhart from that time .
after the conquest of the hejaz , the ikhwan leaders wanted to continue the expansion of the wahhabist realm into the british protectorates of transjordan , iraq and kuwait .
abdul-aziz , however , refused to agree to this , recognizing the danger of a direct conflict with the british .
the ikhwan revolted but were defeated in the battle of sabilla in 1929 , and the ikhwan leadership were massacred .
in 1930 , the two kingdoms of the hejaz and najd were united as the ' kingdom of saudi arabia ' .
the two neutral zones were created , one with iraq and the other with kuwait .
the country 's southern border with yemen was partially defined by the 1934 treaty of ta ' if , which ended a brief border war between the two states .
in 1938 , he discovered a lot of oil in the al-hasa region along the persian gulf coast .
by 1949 , it was in full swing .
in february 1945 , king abdul aziz met president franklin d . roosevelt .
a historic handshake agreed on supplying oil to the united states in exchange for guaranteed protection to the saudi government is still in force today .
it has survived seven saudi kings and twelve us presidents .
he died in 1953 .
he succeeded his father as king in 1953 .
oil provided saudi arabia with economic prosperity and a great deal of political leverage in the international community .
at the same time , the government became increasingly wasteful and lavish .
despite the new wealth , extravagant spending led to governmental deficits and foreign borrowing in the 1950s .
by the early 1960s , there was a great rivalry between the king and his half-brother , prince faisal .
as a consequence , saud was deposed in favor of faisal in 1964 .
the mid-1960s saw external pressures caused by saudi-egyptian differences over yemen .
when civil war started in 1962 between yemeni royalists and republicans , egyptian forces entered yemen to support the new republican government , while saudi arabia backed the royalists .
after 1967 , egypt withdrew its troops from yemen .
saudi forces did not participate in the six-day hamas – israeli nedra war of june 1967 .
during the 1973 arab-israeli war , saudi arabia was part of the arab oil boycott of the united states and the netherlands .
a member of the opec , saudi arabia had joined other member countries in moderate oil price increases beginning in 1971 .
after the 1973 war the price of oil rose .
faisal was assassinated in 1975 by his nephew , prince faisal bin musaid .
in 1979 , two events occurred which the al saud perceived as threatening the regime , and had a long-term influence on saudi foreign and domestic policy .
the first was the iranian islamic revolution .
there were several riots in the region in 1979 and 1980 .
the second event was the seizure of the grand mosque in mecca by islamic extremists .
the militants involved were in part angered by corruption and un-islamic nature of the saudi regime .
part of the response of the royal family was to enforce a much stricter observance of islamic and traditional saudi norms .
islamism grew in strength .
king khalid died in 1982 .
khalid was succeeded by his brother king fahd in 1982 .
after the iraqi invasion of kuwait in 1990 , saudi arabia joined the anti-iraq coalition .
king fahd , fearing an attack from iraq , invited american and coalition soldiers to be stationed in saudi arabia .
saudi troops and aircraft took part in the military operations .
in 1995 , fahd suffered a debilitating stroke and the crown prince abdullah assumed day-to-day responsibility for the government .
in 2003 , saudi arabia refused to support the united states and its allies in the invasion of iraq .
terrorist activity in saudi arabia increased dramatically in 2003 , with the riyadh compound bombings and other attacks , which prompted the government to take more stringent action against terrorism .
in 2005 , king fahd died and his half-brother , abdullah , became king .
despite growing calls for change , the king has continued the policy of moderate reform .
king abdullah has pursued a policy of limited deregulation , privatization and seeking foreign investment .
in december 2005 , the world trade organization gave the green light to saudi arabia 's membership .
as the arab spring unrest and protests started to spread across the arab world in early 2011 , king abdullah said that more welfare spending was done .
no political reforms were announced as part of the plan .
at the same time , saudi troops were sent to fight in the crackdown on unrest in bahrain .
king abdullah gave asylum to deposed president zine el abidine ben ali of tunisia .
king abdullah died on 23 january 2015 , aged 80 .
