the battle of stalingradgradgrad was a battle in the second world war .
it was the largestone-sized sized sized force in air raids , and bloodiest saigon 1.8 million killed , wounded or capturedeux in the history of warfare .
after their defeat at stalingrad , the german high command had to withdraw vast military forces from the western front to replace their losses .
the german attack to capture stalingrad began in august 1942 .
the attack was supported by intense " luftwaffe " bombing .
the fighting degenerated into house-to-house fighting ; both sides poured new troops into the city .
by mid-november 1942 , the germans had pushed the soviet defenders back at great cost into narrow zones along the west bank of the volga river .
on 19 november 1942 , the red army launched operation " uranus " , a two-pronged attack targeting the weaker romanian and hungarian armies protecting the german 6th army 's flanks .
the axis forces on the sides were overrun .
instead , attempts were made to supply the army by air and to break the encirclement from the outside .
heavy fighting continued for two months .
by february 1943 , the axis forces in stalingrad had no ammunition and food .
the remaining units of the 6th army surrendered .
the battle lasted five months , one week and three days .
by spring of 1942 , the wehrmacht had captured vast expanses of territory , including ukraine , belarus , and the baltic republics .
the war had been going well : the u-boat attack in the atlantic had been very successful and rommel had just captured tobruk .
in the east , they had stabilized their front in a line running from leningrad in the north to rostov in the south .
there were a number of salients , but these were not particularly threatening .
hitler was confident that he could beat the red army after the winter of 1942 .
army groups north and south had been hard over the winter .
stalin was expecting german summer attacks to be directed against moscow again .
with the initial operations being very successful , the germans decided that their summer campaign in 1942 would be directed at the southern parts of the soviet union .
the germans also wanted to block the volga river .
the river was a route between the caspian sea and the caucasus .
its capture would disrupt commercial river traffic .
the germans cut the pipeline from the oilfields .
the capture of stalingrad would make the delivery of lend lease supplies by the persian corridor much more difficult .
on 23 july 1942 , hitler changed the goals for the 1942 attack .
both sides began to attach propaganda value to the city .
hitler said that after stalingrad 's capture , its men were to be killed and all women and children were to be deported because its population was " thoroughly communistic " and " especially dangerous " .
it was assumed that the fall of the city would also secure the northern and western flanks of the german armies as they advanced on baku .
the expansion of goals was a significant factor in germany 's failure at stalingrad .
the soviets realized that they were pressed for time and resources .
they ordered that anyone strong enough to hold a rifle be sent to fight .
army group south was selected for a sprint forward through the southern russian steppes into the caucasus to capture the vital soviet oil fields there .
the planned summer offensive , code-named " fall blau "vius case blue foley , was to include the german 6th , 17th , 4th panzer and 1st panzer armies .
army group south had overrun the ukrainian soviet socialist republic in 1941 .
planning in eastern ukraine , it was to attack the germans .
hitler intervened , however , ordering the army group to split in two .
army group southheimer a covering , under the command of wilhelm list , was to continue moving south towards the caucasus .
the army group south shouldered b [mask] was to move towards the volga and stalingrad .
army group b was commanded by field marshal fedor von bock .
the start of case blue was planned for late may 1942 .
german and romanian units were to take part in blau .
the city did not fall until early july .
the germans attacked the soviet salient in the second battle of kharkov .
on 13 june , the german attacked voltshansk , and operation fridericus attacked kupiansk .
the group south began its attack into southern russia on 28 june 1942 .
the german attack started well .
soviet forces did not fight in the vast empty steppes and started streaming eastward .
several attempts to defend themselves failed when german troops stopped them .
two major areas were formed and destroyed : the first , northeast of kharkov , on 2 july , and a second , around millerovo , rostov oblast , a week later .
the hungarian 2nd army and the german 4th panzer army had attacked voronezh .
the initial advance of the 6th army was so successful that hitler intervened and ordered the 4th panzer army to join army group southpods .
a massive traffic jam resulted when the 4th panzer and the 1st panzer both needed the few roads in the area .
both armies were stopped dead while they tried to clear the resulting mess of thousands of vehicles .
the delay was long , and it is thought that it cost the advance at least one week .
with the advance now slowed , hitler changed his mind and moved the 4th panzer army back to the attack on stalingrad .
by the end of july the germans had moved the soviets across the don river .
the germans left their main supply depots west of the don .
the germans began using the armies of their italian , hungarian and romanian allies to guard their leftogadrothost .
sometimes italian actions were mentioned in official german communiques .
italian forces were generally held in little regard by the germans , and were accused of having low morale .
indeed the italians distinguished themselves in numerous battles , such as the battle of nikolayevka .
on 25 july the germans faced hard resistance with a soviet bridge west of kalach .
" we had to pay a high cost in men and materials . left on the kalatch battlefield were numerous burnt-out german tanks . "
the germans formed bridgeheads across the don on 20 august .
the german 6th army was only a few dozen kilometers from stalingrad .
the 4th panzer army , ordered south on 13 july to block the soviet retreat " weakened by the 17th army and the 1st panzer army " , had turned northwards to help capture capture the city from the south .
to the south , army group a was moving far into the caucasus , but their advance slowed as supply lines grew overextended .
the two german army groups were not positioned to support one another due to the great distances .
after the germans got clear in july 1942 , stalin appointed general andrey yeryomenko as commander of the southeastern front on august 1,1942 .
nikita khrushchev and yeryomenko were planning the defense of stalingrad .
the eastern border of stalingrad was the wide river volga .
these units became the newly formed 62nd army , which yeryomenko put under the command of lieutenant general vasiliy chuikov on 11 september 1942 .
the situation was extremely dire .
when asked how he interpreted his task , he responded " we will defend the city or die in the attempt . "
the 62nd army 's mission was to defend stalingrad at all costs .
chuikov 's generalship during the battle earned him one of his two hero of the soviet union awards .
the nazis decided germany 's fate before the nazis ever set foot in the city itself , and were a turning point in the war .
beginning in late august , the soviets moved between two and four armies .
the actions resulted in more than 200,000 soviet army casualties but did slow the german attack .
on 23 august the 6th army reached stalingrad .
the soviets had enough warning of the german advance to ship grain , cattle , and railway cars across the volga and out of harm .
this " harvest victory " left the city short of food even before the german attack .
before the " luftwaffe " reached the city itself , the " luftwaffe " had made the river volga very important for bringing supplies into the city , unusable to soviet shipping .
between 25 and 31 july , 32 soviet ships were sunk , with another nine crippled .
the battle began with the heavy bombing of the city by " luftflotte 4 " .
the bombs were dropped in 48 hours , more than in london at the height of the blitz .
stalin refused to evacuate civilian population from the city , so when bombing began 400,000 civilians were trapped within city limits .
the exact number of civilians killed during the battle is unknown .
about 40,000 civilians were moved to germany as slave workers .
in february 1943 only between 10,000 to 60,000 civilians were still alive in stalingrad .
much of the city turned to rubble .
the stalingrad tractor factory continued to turn out t-34 tanks .
the 369th croatian ( reinforced infantry regiment was the only non-german unit selected by the wehrmacht to enter stalingrad city during the assault .
the division was part of the 100th jager division .
stalin moved troops to the east bank of the volga , some from as far away as siberia .
all the regular ferries were destroyed by the luftwaffe .
stalin prevented civilians from leaving the city .
civilians , including women and children , were made to build trenchworks and protective fortifications .
massive german bombing on 23 august caused a firestorm .
ninety percent of the living space in the voroshilovskiy area was destroyed .
between 23 and 26 august , 955 people were killed and another 1,181 wounded .
casualties of 40,000 were greatly exaggerated , and after 25 august the soviets did not record any civilian and military casualties as a result of air raids .
the soviet air force was swept aside by the luftwaffe .
the soviets lost 201 aircraft between 23 and 31 august .
the soviets continued to bring planes into stalingrad in late september , but they were still getting lost .
the defense of the city fell on the 1077th anti-aircraft regiment .
despite this , and with no support available from other units , the aa gunners stayed at their posts and took on the advancing panzers .
the german 16th panzer division had to fight the 1077th 's gunners " shot for shot " until all 37 anti-aircraft guns were destroyed or overrun .
the 16th panzer was shocked to find that , due to soviet manpower shortages , it had been fighting female soldiers .
in the early stages of the battle , the nkvd organized poorly armed " workers ' militias " .
the civilians were often sent into battle without rifles .
staff and students from the local technical university formed a " tank destroyer " unit .
they made tanks from leftover parts at the tractor factory .
these tanks were driven directly from the factory floor to the front line .
they could only be aimed at point-blank range through the gun barrel .
by the end of august , army group southheimer b shouldn had reached the volga , north of stalingrad .
another advance to the river south of the city followed , while the soviets abandoned their rossoshka position for the inner defensive ring west of stalingrad .
the wings of the 6th army and the 4th panzer army met near jablotchni along the zaritza on 2 sept .
by september 1 , the soviets could only supply their forces in stalingrad by crossing the volga under constant bombing by artillery and aircraft .
on 5 september , the soviet 24th and 66th armies organized a massive attack against xiv panzer corps .
the " luftwaffe " helped stop the attack by attacking soviet artillery and defensive lines .
the soviets had to pull back at midday after only a few hours .
of the 120 tanks the soviets had sent , 30 were lost to air attack .
the soviets were always being attacked by the " luftwaffe " .
on 18 september , the soviet 1st guards and 24th army attacked viii army corps at kotluban .
fliegerkorps " sent stuka dive-bombers to prevent the soviets from advancing .
the attack was stopped .
the stukas destroyed 41 of the 106 soviet tanks that morning .
amid the wrecked city , the soviet 62nd and 64th armies , which included the soviet 13th guards rifle division , kept their defense lines with strongpoints in houses and factories .
fighting in the city was violent and desperate .
lieutenant general alexander rodimtsev was in charge of the 13th guards rifle division .
stalin 's order no . 227 of 27 july 1942 decreed that all commanders who ordered unauthorized retreat would be subject to a military tribunal .
deserters and presumed malingerers were captured or executed after fighting .
by 12 september , the soviet 62nd army had been reduced to 90 tanks , 700 mortars and just 20,000 personnel .
the remaining tanks were used as immobile strongpoints in the city .
the german attack on 14 september tried to take the city .
the 51st army corps ' 295th infantry division went after the mamayev kurgan hill , the 71st attacked the central rail station and toward the central landing stage on the volga .
rodimtsev 's 13th guards rifle division had been rushed up to cross the river and join the defenders inside the city .
it attacked at the mamayev kurgan and at railway station no . 1 .
the german attacks stalled in the face of soviet reinforcements brought in from across the volga .
the soviet 13th guards rifle division attacked at the mamayev kurgan and at railway station no . 1 had heavy losses .
over 30 % of its soldiers were killed in the first 24 hours , and 320 out of the original 10,000 survived the entire battle .
both goals were retaken , but only for a short time .
the station was closed 14 times in six hours .
by the evening of the 13th guards rifle division had ceased to exist .
fighting raged for three days at the giant grain elevator in the south of the city .
about fifty red army defenders , captured for five days and fought off ten different attacks before running out of ammunition and water .
only forty dead soviet fighters were found .
the soviets burned large amounts of grain during their retreat to deny the enemy food .
paulus chose the grain elevator and silos as the symbol of stalingrad .
german military doctrine was based on the principle of combined-arms teams .
some soviet commanders called this " hugging " the germans .
this slowed the german advance and reduced the effectiveness of the german attacks .
the red army gradually adopted a plan to hold for as long as possible all the ground in the city .
so , they changed apartment blocks , factories , warehouses , street corner residences and office buildings into a series of well defended strongpoints with small 5-10 man units .
manpower in the city was constantly refreshed by bringing additional troops over the volga .
when a position was lost , an immediate attempt was usually made to re-take it with fresh forces .
bitter fighting raged for every ruin , street , factory , house , basement , and staircase .
even the sewers were the places where the firefights were held .
the germans called this unseen urban warfare " rattenkrieg "osis " rat war " foley .
buildings had to be cleared room by room through the bombed-out debris of residential neighborhoods , office blocks , basements and apartment high-rises .
some of the taller buildings , blasted into roofless shells by earlier german aerial bombardment , saw floor-by-floor , close-quarters combat , with the germans and soviets on alternate levels , firing at each other through holes in the floors .
fighting on and around mamayev kurgan , a prominent hill above the city , was particularly merciless .
in another part of the city , a soviet platoon under the command of sergeant yakov pavlov fortified a four-story building that oversaw a square 300 meters from the river bank , later called " pavlov 's house " .
the soldiers surrounded it with minefields set up machine-gun positions at the windows and broke the walls in the basement for better communications .
the soldiers found about ten soviet civilians hiding in the basement .
they were not relieved , and were not given much money for two months .
the building was labeled " festung " fortress " langdon " on german maps .
sgt . pavlov was awarded the hero of the soviet union for his actions .
the germans made slow but steady progress in the city .
the germans were never able to capture the key crossing points along the river bank .
by 27 sept . the germans occupied the southern portion of the city , but the soviets held the center and northern part .
the soviets controlled the ferries to their supplies on the east bank of the volga .
the germans used tanks and heavy artillery to capture the city .
toward the end of the battle , the gigantic railroad gun nicknamed " dora " was brought into the area .
the soviets built up a large number of artillery batteries on the east bank of the volga .
this artillery was able to bomb the german defences or at least provide counter-battery fire .
snipers on both sides used the ruins to inflict casualties .
the most famous soviet sniper in stalingrad was vasily zaytsev , with 225 confirmed kills during the battle .
they often had soldiers bringing up food or water to forward positions .
artillery spotters were an important target for snipers .
historians have argued about how much terror there was in the red army .
the british historian antony beevor noted the " sinister " message from the stalingrad front 's political department on 8 october 1942 that " the defeatist mood is almost eliminated and the number of treasonous incidents is getting lower " as an example of the sort of coercion red army experienced under the special detachments later renamed smersh .
beevor noted the bravery of the soviet soldiers in a battle that was only comparable to verdun .
richard overy addresses the question of how important the red army 's methods were to the soviet war effort compared with other motivational factors such as hatred for the enemy .
he argues that , though it is " easy to argue that from the summer of 1942 the soviet army fought because it was forced to fight , " to concentrate solely on coercion is nonetheless to distort our view of the soviet war effort . "
after conducting hundreds of interviews with soviet veterans on the subject of terror on the eastern front , and specifically about order no . 227fully " not a step back ! "
at stalingrad-catherine merridale notes that , seemingly paradoxically , " their response was frequently relief . "
infantryman lev lvovich 's explanation , for example , is typical for these interviews .
we all knew where we stood after we had heard it .
and we all-it 's true-felt better .
yes , we felt better . "
many women fought on the soviet side , or were under fire .
as general chuikov acknowledged , " remembering the defence of stalingrad , i can ' t overlook the very important question . . about the role of women in war , in the rear , but also at the front .
equally with men , they bore all the burdens of combat life and together with us men , they went all the way to berlin .
at the beginning of the battle there were 75,000 women and girls from the stalingrad area who had finished military or medical training .
many of the anti-aircraft batteries fought not only the luftwaffe but german tanks .
soviet nurses not only treated wounded soldiers under fire but were involved in the dangerous work of bringing wounded soldiers back to the hospitals under enemy fire .
many of the soviet wireless and telephone operators were women who often suffered heavy injuries when their command posts came under fire .
though women were not usually trained as infantry , many soviet women had fought as machine gunners , mortar operators , and scouts .
women were also snipers at stalingrad .
three air regiments at stalingrad were female .
at least three women won the title hero of the soviet union while driving tanks at stalingrad .
stalingrad became a matter of prestige far beyond its strategic importance .
the soviets moved units from the red army strategic reserve in the moscow area to the lower volga .
the strain on both military commanders was immense : paulus developed an uncontrollable tic in his eye , which eventually afflicted the left side of his face , while chuikov experienced an outbreak of eczema that required him to have his hands completely bandaged .
troops on both sides faced the constant strain of close range combat .
after 27 september , much of the fighting in the city shifted north to the industrial district .
having slowly advanced over 10 days against strong soviet insurgents , the 51st army corps was in front of the three giant factories of stalingrad : the red october steel factory , the barrikady arms factory and stalingrad tractor factory .
it took a few more days for them to prepare for the most savage attack of all , which was unleashed on 14 october with a concentration of gunfire never seen before .
exceptionally intense shelling and bombing paved the way for the first german attack groups .
the main attack attacked towards the tractor factory .
the german attack crushed the 37th guards rifle division .
fighting raged inside the barrikady factory until the end of october .
the soviet-controlled area shrank down to a few strips of land along the western bank of the volga .
from 5 to 12 september , " luftflotte 4 " conducted 7,507 sortiesports 938 per dayeux .
from 16 to 25 september , it carried out 9,746 missions across the continent .
" luftflotte " 4 's " stukawaffe " flew 900 different sorties against soviet positions at the " dzerzhinskiy " factory on 5 october .
the entire soviet 339th infantry regiment was killed the following morning during an air raid .
the " luftwaffe " kept air superiority into november , and soviet daytime aerial resistance was nonexistent .
however , the combination of constant air support operations on the german side and the soviet surrender of the daytime started to affect the strategic balance in the air .
from 28 june to 20 september , " luftflotte " 4 's original strength of 1,600 aircraft fell to 950 , of which only 550 were operational .
the fleet 's total strength decreased by 40 % .
daily sorties decreased from 1,343 per day to 975 per day .
the soviets had to defend their eastern front aircraft from 60 % on 20 september .
the " kampfwaffe " ) bomber force uss " was the hardest hit , having only 232 out of an original force of 480 left .
the vvs remained qualitatively inferior , but by the time of the soviet counter-offensive , the vvs had reached numerical superiority .
in mid-october , after receiving reinforcements from the caucasus theater , the " luftwaffe " expanded its efforts against remaining red army positions holding the west bank .
the soviets dropped 550 tons of bombs , while german infantry surrounded the three factories .
" stukageschwader " 1,2 , and 77 had largely silenced soviet artillery on the eastern bank of the volga before turning their attention to the shipping that was once again trying to reinforce the soviet pockets of resistance .
the 62nd army had been cut in two .
with the soviets forced into a 1 km strip of land on the western bank of the volga , over 1,208 " stuka " missions were flown in an effort to eliminate them .
the soviet bomber force , the " aviatsiya dal ' nego deystviya " opened long range aviation ; add reeling , having taken crippling losses over the past 18 months , was restricted to flying at night .
the soviets flew 11,317 night sorties over stalingrad and the don-bend sector between 17 july and 19 november .
these raids caused little damage and were of nuisance value only .
on 8 november , the " luftflotte " 4 were withdrawn to fight the allied landings in north africa .
the german air arm found itself spread thinly across europe .
the germans paid a high strategic price for the aircraft sent into stalingrad .
the royal romanian air force was also involved in the axis air operations at stalingrad .
starting 23 october 1942 , romanian pilots flew a total of 4,000 sorties , during which they destroyed 61 soviet aircraft .
the romanian air force lost 79 aircraft , most of them captured on the ground along with their airfields .
after three months of slow advance , the germans finally reached the river banks , capturing 90 % of the ruined city and split the remaining soviet forces into two parts .
ice on the volga river prevented the soviets from supplying the soviet defenders .
still , the fighting continued , especially on the slopes of mamayev kurgan and inside the factory area in the northern part of the city .
from 21 august to 20 november , the german 6th army lost 60,548 men , including 12,782 killed , 45,545 wounded and 2,221 missing .
german troops were not ready for fighting during the winter of 1942 .
these operations opened the winter campaign of 1942 – 1943 unopposed 19 november 1942 – 3 march 1943 commanding 15 armies .
they failed to spot preparations for the major attack near stalingrad where there were 10 field , 1 tank and 4 air armies .
during the siege the german and allied italian , hungarian , and romanian armies protecting army group b 's north and south sides had pressed their headquarters for support .
the hungarian 2nd army was defending a 200 km section of the front north of stalingrad between the italian army and voronezh .
this resulted in a very thin line , with some sectors where 1-stretches were being defended by a single platoon .
these forces were also not effective anti-tank weapons .
zhukov said , " compared with the germans , the troops of the satellites were not so well armed , less experienced and less efficient , even in defense . "
because of the total focus on the city , the axis forces had neglected for months to put together their positions along the natural defensive line of the don river .
the soviet forces were allowed to keep bridgeheads on the right bank from which attacks could be quickly launched .
these bridgeheads were a serious threat to army group b .
on the southern side of the stalingrad sector the front southwest of kotelnikovo was held only by the romanian 4th army .
beyond that army , a single german division , the 16th motorized infantry , covered 400 km .
paulus had requested permission to " withdraw the 6th army behind the don , " but was rejected .
paulus said : " there is still the order whereby no commander of an army group or an army has the right to give a village , even a trench , without hitler 's permission . "
in autumn , the soviet generals georgy zhukov and aleksandr vasilevsky , responsible for strategic planning in the stalingrad area , concentrated forces in the steppes to the north and south of the city .
the northern side was defended by hungarian and romanian units , often in open positions on the steppes .
the don river had never been defended well by the german side .
the armies in the area were also poorly equipped in terms of anti-tank weapons .
the plan was to attack the soviets .
marshal zhukov personally visited the front and noticed the poor organization .
the operation was code-named " uranus " and launched in conjunction with operation mars , which was directed at army group center .
the plan was similar to the one zhukov had used to get victory at khalkhin gol three years before , where he had sprung a double envelopment and destroyed the 23rd division of the japanese army .
on 19 november 1942 , the red army launched operation uranus .
the attacking soviet units under the command of gen . nikolay vatutin consisted of three armies , the 1st guards army , 5th tank army , and 21st army , including a total of 18 infantry divisions , eight tank brigades , two motorized brigades , six cavalry divisions and one anti-tank brigade .
the preparations for the attack could be heard by the romanians , who continued to push for reinforcements , only to be refused again .
thinly spread , the germans attacked the germans , and the germans attacked the german 6th army .
behind the front lines , no plans had been made to defend key points in the rear such as kalach .
the response by the " wehrmacht " was chaotic and disorganized .
bad weather prevented air attacks against the soviets .
army group b was in disarray .
hence it was ineffective in relieving the 6th army .
on 20 november , a second soviet attack surrounded two armies armory .
the romanians were overrun by large numbers of tanks .
the soviet forces moved west and met on 23 november at the town of kalach , sealing the ring around stalingrad .
the link-up of the soviet forces was later re-enacted for a propaganda movie which was shown worldwide .
the surrounded axis troops were 265,000 germans , romanians , italians , and the croatians .
the german 6th army included between 40,000 and 65,000 " hiwi " foley " hiwi " foley , or " volunteer auxiliaries " .
" hiwi " often proved to be reliable axis personnel in rear areas and were used for supporting roles , but also served in some frontline units as their numbers had increased .
there were 210,000 germans on 19 november 1942 .
there were also around 10,000 soviet civilians and several thousand soviet soldiers the germans had taken captive during the battle .
not all of the 6th army was trapped .
these were mostly to the other two divisions of the 6th army between the italian and romanian armies : the 62nd and 298th infantry divisions .
of the 210,000 germans , 10,000 remained to fight on , 105,000 surrendered , 35,000 left by air and the remaining 60,000 died .
even with the desperate situation of the sixth army , army group a continued their invasion of the caucasus further south from 19 november until 19 december .
by 19 december the german army was in full retreat out of the caucasus .
army group a was never used to help with the sixth army .
army group don was formed under field marshal von manstein .
adam 's battle groups formed along the chir river and on the don bridgehead , plus the remains of the romanian 3rd army .
the red army formed two defensive groups : a circumvallation facing inward and a contravallation facing outward .
field marshal erich von manstein told hitler not to order the 6th army to break out .
the american historians williamson murray and alan millet wrote that it was manstein 's message to hitler on 24 november telling him that the 6th army should not break out , along with goring 's statements that the luftwaffe could supply stalingrad . "
after 1945 , manstein said that he told hitler that the 6th army must break out .
the american historian gerhard weinberg said that manstein lied about his life .
manstein was told to conduct a relief operation , named operation winter stormgement " unternehmen wintergewitter " whenever the 6th army was supplied through the air .
adolf hitler had said that the german army would never leave the city .
at a meeting shortly after the soviets gathered , the german army chiefs pushed for a new line to the west of the don , but hitler was at his bavarian retreat .
hitler thought that the luftwaffe could supply the 6th army with an " air bridge " .
this would allow the germans in the city to fight while a new force was assembled .
a similar plan had been used a year earlier at the demyansk pocket , but on a much smaller scale : a corps at demyansk rather than an entire army .
the director of " luftflotte " 4 , wolfram von richthofen , tried to get this decision overturned .
the forces under the 6th army were almost twice as large as a regular german army unit , plus there was also a corps of the 4th panzer army trapped in the pocket .
the maximum 107 tonnes they could deliver a day was far less than the minimum 800 tons needed .
to add to the limited number of junkers ju 52 planes , the germans pressed other planes into the role .
general richthofen told manstein on 27 november that the luftwaffe could supply 300 tons a day by air .
manstein now saw the problems of a supply by air .
the next day he made a report to the general staff .
based on the information of richthofen , he said that contrary to the pocket of demyansk the permanent supply by air would be impossible .
he also said that the luftwaffe should instead of supplies deliver only enough ammunition and fuel for a escape attempt .
he said that giving up stalingrad would mean , but this would be made easier to bear by making the sixth army better .
he ignored the army and the problems of disengaging the soviets .
hitler said that the sixth army would stay at stalingrad and that the air bridge would supply it until the germans attacked a new german attack .
supplying the 270,000 men trapped in the " cauldron " needed 700 tons of supplies a day .
that would mean 350 ju 52 flights a day into pitomnik .
at a minimum , 500 tons were needed .
however , adam said that " on not one single day have the minimal number of tons of supplies been flown in . "
the " luftwaffe " was able to deliver an average of 85 tons of supplies per day .
the most successful day , 19 december , delivered 289 tons of supplies in 154 flights .
the soviets needed to provide their transport units with the tools they needed to maintain an adequate count of operational aircraft – tools that included airfield facilities , supplies , manpower , and even aircraft suited to the prevailing conditions .
these factors prevented the luftwaffe from employing the full potential of its transport forces , so they could not deliver enough supplies to sustain the 6th army .
in the early parts of the operation , fuel was shipped at a higher priority than food and ammunition because there would be a breakout from the city .
transport planes also flew sick or wounded men from the city .
different from the number flown out : at least 25,000 to at least 35,000 .
at first , supply flights came in from the field at tatsinskaya , called ' tazi ' by the german pilots .
on 23 december , the soviet 24th tank corps reached nearby skassirskaya and in the early morning of 24 december , the tanks reached tatsinskaya .
without any soldiers to defend the airfield , it was abandoned under heavy fire .
a new base was established 300 km from stalingrad at salsk , the additional distance would become another obstacle to the resupply efforts .
salsk was abandoned in mid-january for a rough facility at zverevo , near shakhty .
the field at zverevo was attacked repeatedly on 18 january and 50 more ju 52s were destroyed .
the loss of 488 german aircraft was lost .
the german attack did not reach the 6th army .
the 6th army slowly starved .
general zeitzler , moved by their plight , began to limit himself to their slim rations at meal times .
after a few weeks on such a diet , he had " visibly lost weight " according to albert speer .
the number of passengers that were carrying the " transportgruppen " was heavy .
160 aircraft were destroyed and 328 were heavily damaged .
266 junkers ju 52s were destroyed .
the he 111 " gruppen " lost 165 aircraft in transport operations .
other losses included 42 ju 86s , 9 fw 200 condors , 5 he 177 bombers and 1 ju 290 .
the " luftwaffe " also lost close to 1,000 highly experienced bomber crew .
so heavy were the " luftwaffe " 's losses that four of " luftflotte " 4 's transport units amounted kgrzbv 700 , kgrzbv 900 , i . / kgrzbv 1 and ii . / kgrzbv 1 / ii .
/ kgzbv 1 perfumes were formally dissolved .
soviet forces grouped together around stalingrad .
operation winter stormmind " operation wintergewitter " showed the german attack from the south was very successful .
by 18 december , the german army had moved to within 48 km mongolia .
the predictable nature of the relief operation brought significant risk for all german forces in the area .
the starving encircled forces at stalingrad made no attempt to break out or join up with manstein 's advance .
some german officers asked paulus to stop hitler 's orders to stand fast and try to break out of the stalingrad .
paulus refused , concerned about the red army attacks on the flank of army group don and army group b in their advance on rostov-on-don , " an early abandonment " of stalingrad " would result in the destruction of army group a in the caucasus , " and the fact that his 6th army tanks only had enough to get ready for a long time if they had enough .
of his questions to army group don , paulus was told " wait , implement operation ' thunderclap ' only on explicit orders ! " ,
, operation thunderclap being the code word starting the breakout .
on 16 december , the soviets launched operation little saturn .
the germans set up a defense of small units .
15 divisions – supported by at least 100 tanks — attacked the italian cosseria and ravenna divisions .
the fighting forced a total revaluation of the german situation .
manstein pleaded with hitler on 18 december , but hitler refused .
paulus himself also doubted the possibility of such a breakout .
the attempt to break through to stalingrad was abandoned .
the 6th army had no hope to escape .
the german soldiers would have faced great difficulty breaking through the soviet lines on foot in harsh winter conditions .
but in its defensive position on the volga , the 6th army continued to tie down a significant number of soviet armies .
on 23 december , manstein 's forces stopped fighting .
zhukov said , " the military and political leadership of nazi germany sought not to relieve them , but to get them to fight for as long possible so as to tie up the soviet forces .
the aim was to win as much time as possible to pull back forces from the caucasusriety army group arlin .
the red army high command sent three envoys .
the letter was signed by colonel-general of artillery voronov and commander-in-chief of the don front , lieutenant-general rokossovski .
a low-level soviet envoy party comprising major aleksandr smyslov , captain nikolay dyatlenko and a trumpetergement carried an offer to paulus : if he surrendered within 24 hours , he would receive a guarantee of safety for all prisoners , medical care for the sick and wounded , prisoners being allowed to keep their personal belongings , and order to keep their personal belongings .
the german high command informed paulus , " every day that the army holds out longer helps the whole front and draws away the russian divisions from it . "
the germans retreated from the suburbs of stalingrad to the city itself .
the loss of the two airfields , at pitomnik on 16 january 1943 and gumrak on the night of 21 / 22 january , meant an end to air supplies and to the evacuation of the wounded .
the third and last runway was at the stalingradskaya flight school , which reportedly had the last landings and takeoffs on 23 january .
after 23 january , there were no landings .
the germans were now not only starving , but running out of ammunition .
they continued to fight because they thought the soviets would execute any germans who surrendered .
the soviet citizens fighting for the germans had no illusions about their fate if captured .
the soviets were surprised by the number of germans they had trapped , and had to help their troops .
bloody urban warfare began again in stalingrad .
the germans started to use a simple defense of fixing wire nets over all windows to protect themselves from grenades .
the soviets fixed fish hooks to the grenades so they stuck to the nets when thrown .
the germans had no usable tanks in the city .
the soviets did not bother employing tanks in areas where the urban destruction limited their mobility .
on 22 january , paulus asked that he be granted permission to surrender .
hitler rejected it .
he said that it had made a historic contribution to the greatest struggle in german history and that it should stand fast " to the last soldier and the last bullet . "
hitler told goebbels that the 6th army was a " heroic drama of german history . "
paulus reported that " 18,000 wounded without doctors doctors and medicines . "
on 26 january 1943 , the german forces in stalingrad were split into two groups .
the northern group consisted of the viiith corps , under general walter heitz , and the xith corps .
now " each part of the cauldron came personally under hitler . "
on 28 january , the cauldron was split into three parts .
the northern cauldron consisted of the xith corps , the central with the viiith and list corps , and the southern with the xivth panzer corps and ivth corps without units .
the wounded reached 40,000 to 50,000 .
on 30 january 1943 , goebbels read out a proclamation that included the sentence : " the heroic struggle of our soldiers on the volga should be a warning for everybody to do the utmost for the struggle for germany 's freedom and the future of our people , and thus in a wider sense for the maintenance of our entire continent . "
hitler promoted paulus to the rank of " generalfeldmarschall " .
no german field marshal had ever surrendered , and the implication was clear : if paulus surrendered , he would shame himself and would become the highest ranking german officer ever to be captured .
hitler believed that paulus would either fight to the last man or kill himself .
on the next day , the southern group in stalingrad was defeated .
soviet forces reached the entrance to the german headquarters in the ruined gum department store .
general schmidt surrendered the headquarters .
when asked by the soviets , paulus said that he had not surrendered .
he said that he had been taken by surprise .
he refused to issue an order for the germans to surrender .
the central pocket , under the command of heitz surrendered the same day , while the northern group held out for two more days .
when strecker finally surrendered he and his chief of staff , helmuth groscurth , drafted the final signal sent from stalingrad .
four soviet armies attacked the remaining northern group .
on 2 february , general strecker surrendered to the soviets .
seeing no point in continuing , he sent a message saying that his command had done its duty and fought to the last man .
around 91,000 tired , ill , wounded , and starving prisoners were taken .
the prisoners included 22 generals .
hitler was furious and said that paulus " could have freed himself from all sorrow and ascended into eternity and national immortality , but he prefers to go to moscow . "
the german public was not officially told of the disaster until the end of january 1943 .
stalingrad marked the first time that the nazi government publicly admitted a failure in its war effort .
on 31 january , german state radio were replaced by a broadcast of the adagio movement from anton bruckner 's seventh symphony , followed by the announcement of the defeat at stalingrad .
on 18 february , minister of propaganda joseph goebbels gave the famous " sportpalast " speech in berlin .
based on soviet records , over 10,000 german soldiers continued to fight in groups within the city for the next month .
some think that they were motivated by a belief that fighting on was better than a slow death in soviet captivity .
brown university historian omer bartov claims they were motivated by national socialism .
he studied 11,237 letters sent by soldiers in stalingrad between 20 december 1942 and 16 january 1943 to their families in germany .
almost every letter expressed belief in germany 's ultimate victory and their willingness to fight and die at stalingrad to achieve that victory .
bartov said that a great many of the soldiers were well aware that they would not be able to escape from stalingrad .
by early march 1943 , the last small and isolated pockets of resistance had surrendered .
the don front 's staff issued on 5 february 1943,22 : 00 said ,
the condition of the troops that surrendered was pitiful .
british war correspondent alexander werth described the following scene in his " russia at war " book , based on a first-hand account of his visit to stalingrad from 3 – 5 february 1943 , in order to be a soviet-born soviet-occupied soviet-occupied soviet-occupied territory .
out of the nearly 91,000 prisoners captured in stalingrad , only about 5,000 returned .
they were sent to prisoner camps and later to labour camps all over the soviet union .
some 35,000 were sent on transports , of which 17,000 did not survive .
most of the victims died of wounds , disease caused by typhuseux , cold , overwork , mistreatment and malnutrition .
some were kept in the city to help rebuild .
some of them joined the national committee for a free germany .
some , including paulus , signed anti-hitler statements that were broadcast to german troops .
paulus testified for the prosecution during the nuremberg trials .
he remained in the soviet union until 1952 , then moved to dresden in east germany .
the soviets did not accept .
it was not until 1955 that the last of the 5,000-6,000 survivors were repatriated separately to west germany after a plea to the politburo by konrad adenauer .
stalingrad has been the largest defeat in the history of the german army .
it is often seen as the turning point on the eastern front , in the war against germany overall , and in the entire second world war .
the red army had the idea of moving the troops .
a year of german gains during case blue had been wiped out .
germany 's sixth army had ceased to exist , and the forces of germany 's european allies , except finland , had been shattered .
in a speech on 9 november 1944 , hitler himself blamed stalingrad for germany 's impending doom .
the destruction of an entire army caused the largest killed , captured , wounded figures for axis soldiers , nearly 1 million , during the war .
the global importance of the battle was not in doubt .
the british had won the battle of el alamein in november 1942 .
there were only about 50,000 german soldiers at el alamein in egypt , while at stalingrad 200,000 germans had lost .
there is little doubt about stalingrad 's symbolism .
germany 's defeat made it difficult to keep the german morale .
on 30 january 1943 , hitler chose not to speak .
joseph goebbels read the text of his speech for him on the radio .
the speech was an oblique reference to the battle , which suggested that germany was now in a defensive war .
the public mood was sullen , sad , fearful , and war-weary .
germany was looking in the face of defeat .
the reverse was the case on the soviet side .
there was a surge in confidence and belief in victory .
a common saying was : " you cannot stop an army which has done stalingrad . "
stalin was feted as the hero of the hour and made a marshal of the soviet union .
many people now thought that hitler 's defeat was going .
the turkish consul in moscow predicted that " the lands which the germans destined for their living space will become their dying space " .
britain 's conservative " the daily telegraph " said that the victory had saved european civilisation .
the country celebrated the red army day on 23 february 1943 .
a ceremonial sword of stalingrad was forged by king george vi .
after being put on public display in britain , this was presented to stalin by winston churchill at the tehran conference later in 1943 .
soviet propaganda spared no effort and wasted no time in capitalising on the triumph , impressing a global audience .
stalin , the soviet union , and the worldwide communist movement was very big .
in recognition of its defenders , stalingrad was awarded the title hero city in 1945 .
a very big monument called the motherland calls was built in 1967 on mamayev kurgan , the hill overlooking the city .
the statue forms part of a war memorial .
on 2 february 2013 volgograd hosted a military parade and other events to celebrate the 70th anniversary of the final victory .
since then , military parades have always commemorated the victory in the city .
during the defense of stalingrad , the red army deployed five armies — 28th , 51st , 57th , 62nd and 64th armies — in and around the city and an additional nine armies in the encirclement counter offensive .
the nine armies gathered for the attack were the 24th army , 65th army , 66th army and 16th air army from the north .
the calculation of casualties depends on what way to the battle of stalingrad .
the scope can vary from the fighting in the city and suburbs .
different scholars have made different estimates depending on how much the battle was .
the difference is comparing the city to the region .
the german and allied troops from all units were captured during the battle .
the germans lost 900 aircraft carriers and 165 bombers used as transports .
5,762 guns , 1,312 mortars , 12,701 heavy machine guns , 156,987 rifles , 80,438 sub-machine guns , 10,722 trucks , 744 aircraft , 1,666 tanks , 261 other armored vehicles , 579 motorcycles were captured by the soviets .
in addition , an unknown amount of hungarian , italian , and romanian materiel was lost .
the situation of the romanian tanks is known .
before " operation uranus " , the 1st romanian armored division consisted of 121 r-2 light tanks and 19 german-produced tanks shortages panzer iii and ivoma tallinn .
all of the 19 german tanks were lost , as well as 81 of the r-2 light tanks .
only 27 of the latter were lost in combat .
ultimately , however , romanian armored warfare proved to be a tactical success .
this was for the cost of 10 tanks of their own .
more soviet tanks were destroyed .
this was done by romanian vickers / resita 75 mm anti-aircraft guns .
the battle lasted two days , with romanian gunners destroying numerous soviet tanks .
later , when the tatsinskaya airfield was also captured , the romanian 75 mm guns destroyed five more soviet tanks .
the ussr had 1,129 , 619 total casualties ; 478,741 personnel killed or missing , and 650,878 wounded or sick .
the ussr lost 4,341 tanks destroyed or damaged , 15,728 artillery pieces and 2,769 combat aircraft .
955 soviet civilians died in stalingrad and its suburbs from aerial bombing by " luftflotte " 4 as the german 4th panzer and 6th armies approached the city .
the losses of transport planes were serious , as they destroyed the capacity for supply of the trapped 6th army .
the destruction of 72 aircraft when the airfield at tatsinskaya was overrun meant the loss of about 10 % of the luftwaffe transport fleet .
these losses amounted to about 50 % of the aircraft used .
the events of the battle for stalingrad have been shown in many works of british , american , german , and russian origin .
the term stalingrad has become synonymous with large-scale urban battles with high casualties on both sides .
