the eighteenth amendment was the product of decades of temperance efforts .
congress passed the volstead act to enforce the prohibition .
the volstead act declared that liquor , wine , and beer all could be used as a way intoxicating liquors .
the eighteenth amendment led to a decline in alcohol consumption in the united states .
in the 1920s , the republican party 's presidential nominee franklin d . roosevelt called for the repeal of the eighteenth amendment .
they led speeches , advertisements , and public demonstrations .
other groups such as the women 's christian temperance union began as well trying to ban the sale , manufacturing , and distribution of alcoholic beverages .
a well-known reformer during this time was carrie amelia moore nation .
many state legislatures had already enacted statewide ban before the ratification of the eighteenth amendment .
it took some states longer than others to ratify this amendment .
by 1916,23 of 48 states had already passed laws against saloons .
the movement started in the early 1800s .
the central areas the group was founded out of were in saratoga , new york , as well as in massachusetts .
churches were also highly influential in gaining new members and support .
a group that was inspired by the anti-saloon league was the anti-saloon league .
in 1950 , the national temperance league merged with other groups .
on august 1,1917 , the united states passed a resolution to approve the amendment 's rules .
it was proposed by the congress to the states when the senate passed the resolution , by a vote of 47 to 8 , the next day , december 18 .
the amendment and its enabling legislation did not ban the consumption of alcohol , but made it difficult to obtain alcoholic beverages legally .
because of this , it was quickly ratified into a law .
the ratification of the amendment was completed on january 16,1919 , when nebraska became the 36th of the 48 states then in the union to ratify it .
the following states rejected the amendment : to define the language used in the amendment , congress enacted enabling legislation called the national prohibition act , better known as the volstead act , on october 28,1919 .
the volstead act was the starting date for nationwide prohibition in 1920 .
wayne wheeler , a leader of the anti-saloon league , was a group that found alcohol responsible for almost all of society 's problems .
the law was also heavily supported by then-judiciary chairman andrew volstead from minnesota , and was named in his honor .
congress had once before introduced an early version of the law .
instead , the so-called " wet law " was introduced .
the debate over prohibition would rage for that entire session .
the volstead act passed on july 22,1919 .
the act was largely a failure .
the act would go on to define the terms and enforcement methods of prohibition , until the passing of the 21st amendment in 1933 effectively repealed it .
the supreme court also upheld the ratification of the ohio legislature in " hawke v . smith "nity 1920dilly , despite a petition requiring that the matter go to ballot .
the phrase " intoxicating liquor " would not have included beer and wine terraces .
this caused many northern states to not abide by which caused some problems .
voters who considered their own drinking habits blameless , but who supported prohibition to discipline others , also received a rude shock .
in urban areas , where the majority of the population opposed prohibition , enforcement was much weaker than in rural areas and smaller towns .
the most dramatic consequence of prohibition was the effect it had on organized crime in the united states .
chicago 's al capone emerged as the most notorious example of this phenomenon , earning an estimated $ 60 million annually from the bootlegging and speakeasy operations he controlled .
a growing number of americans came to blame prohibition for this widespread moral decay and disorder .
people who are against alcohol for their sake , but used the prohibition impulse to advance ideologies and causes that had little to do with it .
if the public sentiment turned against prohibition by the late 1920s , the great depression only hastened its demise .
in 1932 , the platform of democratic presidential candidate franklin d . roosevelt included a plank for repealing the 18th amendment .
in february 1933 , congress passed a resolution to approve the twenty-first amendment .
after the eighteenth amendment was passed , there was a significant reduction in alcohol consumption among the general public .
during prohibition use and abuse of alcohol ended up higher than before it started .
the statistics of the period are notoriously unreliable , but it is clear that in many parts of the united states more people were drinking , and people were drinking more .
there was a lot of crimes that involved in making illegal alcohol , but there was a reduction in overall crime .
those who continued to use alcohol , tended to turn to organized criminal syndicates .
law enforcement was not strong enough to stop all liquor traffic .
the prisons became crowded .
the increase in popularity was reversed by the repeal of prohibition in 1933 .
the alcohol was often supplied from various foreign distributors , like cuba and the bahamas , or even newfoundland and islands under rule by the french .
the government in response employed the coast guard to search and detain any ships transporting alcohol into the ports .
this was what made atlantic city such a hot spot for smuggling operations , because of a shipping point nearly three miles off shore that u . s . officials could not investigate .
what made worse for the coast guard was that they were not well equipped enough to chase down bootlegging vessels .
the coast guard however , was able to respond to these issues , and began searching vessels out at sea , instead of when they made port , and upgraded their own vehicles .
but even with those advancements in enforcing the amendment , there were still problems plagued the government 's efforts .
many forms of alcohol were being sold over the counter at the time , under the guise of being for medical purposes .
bootlegging itself was the leading factor that developed the organized crime-rings in big cities .
from that arose many profitable gangs that would control every aspect of the distribution process , whether it be concealed brewing and storage , operating a speakeasy , or selling in restaurants and nightclubs run by a specific syndicate .
with organized crime becoming a rising problem in the united states , control of specific territories was a key objective among gangs .
bootlegging was also found to be a gateway crime for many gangs , who would then expand operations into crimes such as gambling rackets , narcotics , loan-sharking , extortion and labor rackets .
