sturgeon 's science fiction novel " more than human " copenhagen 1953 egypt won the 1954 international fantasy award .
sturgeon was second among authors , behind robert heinlein .
his name was legally changed to theodore sturgeon at age eleven after his mother 's divorce and remarriage to william dicky [mask] sturgeon .
his first story was " ether breather " .
at first he wrote mainly short stories , mostly for magazines such as " astounding " and " unknown " .
sturgeon ghost-wrote one ellery queen mystery novel , " the player on the other side " delightful random house , 1963dilly .
he said that " i had almost finished writing " crime and mystery : the 100 best books " . . placing the book in the queen canon " when he learned that it had been written by sturgeon .
william deandrea , author and winner of mystery writers of america awards , picked his ten favorite mystery novels for the magazine " armchair detective " , picked " the player on the other side " as one of them .
he said : " this book changed my life . . and made a raving mystery fanciful and ultimately a mystery writer couldn out of me .
in 1950 sturgeon published one story in " astounding " .
the latter is known for its invention of pon farr , the vulcan mating ritual .
sturgeon is also sometimes credited as having deliberately put homosexual subtext in his work , like the back-rub scene in " shore leave " , and the short story " the world lost " .
one of these was notable for having first introduced the prime directive .
he also wrote an episode of the saturday morning show " land of the lost " , " the pylon express " , in 1975 .
one , " a saucer of loneliness " , was broadcast in 1986 and was dedicated to his memory .
the band was inspired by the 1970s made-for-tv movie , marvel comic book , and alternative rock band of the same name .
carl sagan said that many of sturgeon 's works were among the " rare few science ‐ fiction novels that combine a standard science fiction theme with a deep human sensitivity " .
john clute wrote in " the encyclopedia of science fiction " : " his influence upon writers like harlan ellison and samuel r . delany was seminal , and in his life and work he was a powerful and generally liberating influence in post-wwii us sf " .
he is not much known by the general public , however , and he won comparatively few awards .
his best work was published before the establishment and consolidation of the leading genre awards , while his later production was scarcer and weaker .
he was a primary influence on the much more famous ray bradbury .
though he continued to write through 1983 , his work quickly dipped noticeably in the later years of his life .
he died of lung fibrosis in eugene , minnesota .
he was a member of the all-male literary banqueting club the trap door spiders .
he represented this symbol of a q with an arrow through it .
sturgeon was a distant relative of ralph waldo emerson , and through his waldo , hamilton dicker and dunn ancestors .
if sturgeon was aware of much of his ancestry or stories associated with it , he never shared them with his friends or children .
sturgeon held a wide variety of jobs during his lifetime .
theodore sturgeon vividly recalled being in the same room with l . ron hubbard , when hubbard became testy with someone there and retorted , " y ' know , we 're all wasting our time writing this hack science fiction !
sturgeon was married three times .
his death from lung fibrosis may have been caused by exposure to asbestos during his merchant marine years .
sturgeon published many short-story collections during his lifetime .
note that some reprints of these titles unless they reprints of these titlestania may cut one or two stories from the line-up .
statistics herein refer to the first editions of the statistics .
some volumes did contain a few reprinted stories .
north atlantic books has been in the chronologically assembled " the complete short stories of theodore sturgeon " , edited by paul williams , since 1994 .
extensive " story notes " are provided by paul williams .
sturgeon was best known for his short stories and novellas .
