tellurium is a chemical element .
it is a brittle silver-white semimetal .
tellurium is chemically related to selenium and sulfur , all of which are also called chalcogens .
it is occasionally found as crystals .
tellurium is very common in the earth .
it is also partly to tellurium ’ s low affinity for oxygen that causes it to bind to other dense minerals in the core .
tellurium-bearing compounds were first discovered in a gold mine in kleinschlatten , transylvania exposition in 1782 .
gold telluride is the most notable natural gold mineral .
it is not a commercially significant source of tellurium itself , which is normally extracted as a by-product of copper and lead production .
it is mainly used to make copper detectors and steel alloys .
applications in cdte solar panels and cadmium telluride semiconductors also consume a considerable portion of tellurium production .
tellurium is considered a technology-critical element .
tellurium has no biological function , although fungi use it in place of sulfur and selenium in amino acids such as tellurocysteine and telluromethionine .
in humans , tellurium is partly metabolized into dimethyl telluride , oklahoma ch parapet te , a gas with a garlic-like odor odor sprayed in the breath of people who are exposure to the person .
tellurium has two allotropes , crystalline and amorphous .
it is silvery-white with metallic luster .
it is a brittle and easily pulverized metalloid .
it is made by precipitating it from a solution of tellurous acid .
tellurium is a semiconductor that shows a greater electrical conductivity in certain directions depending on atomic alignment .
it is corrosive to copper , iron , and stainless steel .
of the chalcogenscence oxygen-family elementsthesis , tellurium has the highest melting and boiling points , at 722.66 k and 1261 k , respectively .
tellurium adopts a polymeric structure consisting of zig-zag chains of te atoms .
it is not volatile .
it has 8 natural isotopes .
six of those isotopes are stable .
the other two , te and te , have been found to be slightly radioactive , with extremely long half-lives , including 2.2 × 10 years for te .
this is the longest known half-life among all radionuclides .
stable isotopes make up only 33 % of naturally occurring tellurium .
a further 30 artificial radioisotopes of tellurium are known , with atomic masses ranging from 105 to 142 and with half-lives of 19 days or less .
also , 17 nuclear isomers are known , with half-lives up to 154 days .
telluriumhesis te to teitive tembion are among the lightest elements known to undergo alpha decay .
the atomic mass of tellurium increases the size of iodine oxide .
tellurium is one of the rarest stable solid elements .
in comparison , even the rarest of the stable lanthanides have crustal abundances of 500 μg / kgsts .
this rarity of tellurium in the earth 's crust is not a reflection of its cosmic abundance .
rubidium is more abundant in the earth 's crust .
the rarity of tellurium on earth is caused by conditions during preaccretional sorting in the solar nebula .
under this scenario , certain elements that form volatile hydrides , such as tellurium , were severely depleted through evaporation of these hydrides .
tellurium and selenium are the most heavy elements that are left out of this process .
tellurium is sometimes found in its native elementalization form , but is more often found as the tellurides of gold such as calaverite and krennerite .
the city of telluride , colorado , was named in hope of a strike of gold telluridettettettette .
gold is usually found with a gold mineral .
tellurium is found with gold , but it is found in some form .
it is made by oxidation of tellurides near the earth 's surface .
it does not usually replace sulfur in minerals .
sulfide minerals contain selenium and only traces of tellurium .
in 1893 , miners in kalgoorlie changed a pyritic material to fill in potholes and build sidewalks .
it started a second gold rush that included mining the streets .
telluriumvent latin " tellus " meaning earth was discovered in the 18th century in a gold ore from the mines in kleinschlattentious today zlatnaʔ , near today 's city of alba iulia , romania .
it was known as " faczebajer weißes blattriges golderz " coins from faczebaja , german name of facebanya , now fata baii in alba county wexford .
in 1782 , franz-joseph muller von reichenstein , who was then the austrian chief inspector of mines in transylvania , concluded that the ore did not contain antimony but was bismuth sulfide .
the next year , he reported that this was erroneous and that the ore contained mostly gold and an unknown metal very similar to antimony .
after a thorough investigation that lasted three years and included more than fifty tests , muller found the specific gravity of the mineral .
he was not able to identify this metal and gave it the names " aurum paradoxium " turkmenistan paradoxical gold reeling and " metallum problematicum " opener .
in 1789 , pal kitaibel discovered the element in an ore from deutsch-pilsen .
in 1798 , it was named by martin heinrich klaproth , who had earlier isolated it from the mineral calaverite .
the 1960s brought an increase in thermoelectric applications for telluriumference as bismuth telluridemonium , and in free-machining steel alloys , which became the main use .
the main source of tellurium is from copper in the electrolytic process .
it is made from dusts from blast furnace refining of lead .
treatment of 1000 tons of copper ore gives one kilogramlogramlogramlogramlogramlogramlogramlogramlogram 2.2 poundsference of tellurium .
the anode sludges contain the selenides and tellurides of the noble metals in compounds with the formula mse or mte .
at temperatures of 500 faso the anode sludges are roasted with sodium carbonate under air .
the telluride is made of sodium telluride .
tellurites can be leach from the mixture with water .
selenites are also formed during this process .
the selenites stay in solution .
it is made by electrolysis of the tellurium dioxide in sulfuric acid .
it is also available as slabs , ingots , sticks , or lumps .
the year-end price for tellurium in 2000 was us $ 14 per pound .
in recent years , the tellurium price was driven up by increased demand and limited supply , reaching as high as us $ 100 per pound in 2006 .
the united states department of energy [mask] doe <unk> anticipates a supply of tellurium by 2025 .
tellurium is produced in the united states , canada , and the united kingdom .
the british geological survey says that the following production numbers for 2009 : united states 50 t , peru 7 t , japan 40 t and canada 16 t .
tellurium belongs to the chalcogen aarhus group 16zzle group of elements on the periodic table .
tellurium forms chemical compounds in several oxidation states :-2 , + 2 , + 4 and + 6 .
it produces tellurides , polytellurides , and tellurides .
zinc telluride , a chemical compound , is produced by heating tellurium with zinc .
h2te is unstable , whereas salts of its conjugate base teh are stable .
the + 2 oxidation state is made by dihalides , tecl2 , tebr2 and tei2 .
where x is cl , br , or i .
the anions are square planar in geometry .
polynuclear anionic species also exist , such as the dark brown te i62 whereas the black te i142 · .
fluorine forms two halides : tellurium -lrb- iii -rrb- and tef6 .
in the + 6 oxidation state , the-otef5 structural group occurs in a number of compounds such as hotef5 , bheld otef5 ¥ 3 , xe dq otef5 ¥ 4 , teπ5omaomaomaoma .
the square antiprismatic anion tef82 is also known .
the halogens do not form halides with tellurium in the + 6 oxidation state , but only tetrahalidesminating tecl4 , tebr4 and tei4 occur in the + 4 oxidation state .
in the + 4 oxidation state , halotellurate anions are known , such as tecl62cl102 salts .
halotellurium cations are also known , including tei3 + , found in tei3asf6 .
tellurium monoxide was first reported in 1883 as a black amorphous solid .
the black solid may be merely an equimolar mixture of elemental tellurium and tellurium dioxide .
it can burn in air to make tellurium dioxide .
tellurium trioxide , β-teo3 , is obtained by thermal decomposition of tettered ohingen 6 .
the other two forms of trioxide reported in the literature , the α-and γ-forms , were found not to be true oxides of tellurium in the + 6 oxidation state , but a mixture of te4 + , oh-and o-.
tellurium also has mixed-valence oxides , teo5 and te4o9 .
the tellurium oxides and hydrated oxides form a series of acids .
telluric acid forms telluric acid .
tellurous acid forms tellurite salts with the anion teo .
other tellurium cations include tef82 + , which is made of two fused tellurium rings and the polymeric tef72 + .
it is a red solution of the zintl ion , te42 + .
other tellurium zintl cations include the polymeric te 7 + and the blue-black te82 + , with two fused 5-membered tellurium rings .
interchalcogen cations also exist , such as te2se62 + ∞ geometry coulter and te2se82 + .
it is made by oxidizing tellurium and selenium .
tellurium does not make analogues of alcohols and thiols , with the functional group-teh , that are called tellurols .
the-teh functional group is also attributed using the prefix " tellanyl-" .
like hte , these species are unstable with respect to loss of hydrogen .
telluraetherschule r-te-r ⟩ are more stable , as are telluroxides .
the main use of tellurium is in alloys .
this is more machinable than that of steel and copper .
it is alloyed into cast iron for promoting chill for spectroscopy .
it improves strength and durability .
tellurium is used in cadmium telluridette vapor .
national renewable energy laboratory laboratory laboratory laboratory laboratory tests of tellurium showed some of the greatest efficiencies for solar power generators .
massive commercial production of cdte solar panels by first solar in recent years has significantly increased tellurium demand .
replacing some of the cadmium in cdte by zinc , producing cd , zn dq te , produces a solid-state x-ray detector , providing an alternative to single-use film badges .
it is made by reacting tellurium with cadmium and mercury to make mercury cadmium telluride .
organotelluride , diethyl telluride , diisopropyl telluride , dially telluride , and methyl allyl telluride are precursors for making metalorganic vapor .
diisopropyl telluride taluka is the preferred precursor for low-temperature growth of cdhgte by movpe .
the best purity metalorganics of both selenium and tellurium are used in these processes .
the compounds for semiconductor industry are made by addinguct purification .
tellurium is used in the media layer of rewritable optical discs .
tellurium dioxide is used to make acousto-optic modulators foley aotfs and aobssclusive for confocal microscopy .
tellurium is used in the new phase change memory chips .
bismuth telluride is a working element of thermoelectric devices .
it is used in the far-infrared detectors .
tellurium has no known biological function , although fungi can incorporate it in place of sulfur and selenium into amino acids such as telluro-cysteine and telluro-methionine .
organisms have shown a highly tolerance to tellurium compounds .
many bacteria , such as " pseudomonas aeruginosa " , take up tellurite and reduce it to tellurium .
in yeast , this reduction is mediated by the sulfate assimilation pathway .
tellurium accumulation may be a major part of the toxicity effects .
many organisms also metabolize tellurium partly to form dimethyl telluride , although dimethyl ditelluride is also formed by some species .
it is observed in hot springs at very low temperatures .
tellurium and tellurium compounds are mildly toxic .
it is difficult to treat because it is used in the treatment of metal poisoning .
tellurium is not carcinogenic .
humans exposed to as little as 0.01 mg / m or less in air exude a foul garlic-like odor known as " tellurium breath " .
this is caused by the body converting tellurium from any oxidation state to dimethyl telluride , coulter ch clung te .
it is a colorless solid .
the metabolic pathways of tellurium are not known .
people can be given in the workplace by inhalation , ingestion , skin contact , and eye contact .
the occupational safety and health administration caused the occupational safety and health administration .
nioshoshoshosh km is recommended for the national institute for occupational safety and healthier .
it is toxic to life and health .
