tellurium is very common in the earth .
it is also partly to tellurium ’ s low affinity for oxygen that causes it to bind to other dense minerals in the core .
tellurium-bearing compounds were first discovered in a gold mine in kleinschlatten , transylvania exposition in 1782 .
gold telluride is the most notable natural gold mineral .
it is not a commercially significant source of tellurium itself , which is normally extracted as a by-product of copper and lead production .
it is mainly used to make copper detectors and steel alloys .
in humans , tellurium is partly metabolized into dimethyl telluride , oklahoma ch parapet te , a gas with a garlic-like odor odor sprayed in the breath of people who are exposure to the person .
it is made by precipitating it from a solution of tellurous acid .
the other two , te and te , have been found to be slightly radioactive , with extremely long half-lives , including 2.2 × 10 years for te .
also , 17 nuclear isomers are known , with half-lives up to 154 days .
the atomic mass of tellurium increases the size of iodine oxide .
tellurium is one of the rarest stable solid elements .
in comparison , even the rarest of the stable lanthanides have crustal abundances of 500 μg / kgsts .
this rarity of tellurium in the earth 's crust is not a reflection of its cosmic abundance .
the rarity of tellurium on earth is caused by conditions during preaccretional sorting in the solar nebula .
under this scenario , certain elements that form volatile hydrides , such as tellurium , were severely depleted through evaporation of these hydrides .
tellurium and selenium are the most heavy elements that are left out of this process .
tellurium is sometimes found in its native elementalization form , but is more often found as the tellurides of gold such as calaverite and krennerite .
the city of telluride , colorado , was named in hope of a strike of gold telluridettettettette .
it is made by oxidation of tellurides near the earth 's surface .
it does not usually replace sulfur in minerals .
in 1893 , miners in kalgoorlie changed a pyritic material to fill in potholes and build sidewalks .
it started a second gold rush that included mining the streets .
telluriumvent latin " tellus " meaning earth was discovered in the 18th century in a gold ore from the mines in kleinschlattentious today zlatnaʔ , near today 's city of alba iulia , romania .
the next year , he reported that this was erroneous and that the ore contained mostly gold and an unknown metal very similar to antimony .
after a thorough investigation that lasted three years and included more than fifty tests , muller found the specific gravity of the mineral .
he was not able to identify this metal and gave it the names " aurum paradoxium " turkmenistan paradoxical gold reeling and " metallum problematicum " opener .
in 1789 , pal kitaibel discovered the element in an ore from deutsch-pilsen .
in 1798 , it was named by martin heinrich klaproth , who had earlier isolated it from the mineral calaverite .
the 1960s brought an increase in thermoelectric applications for telluriumference as bismuth telluridemonium , and in free-machining steel alloys , which became the main use .
the main source of tellurium is from copper in the electrolytic process .
the anode sludges contain the selenides and tellurides of the noble metals in compounds with the formula mse or mte .
tellurites can be leach from the mixture with water .
selenites are also formed during this process .
it is made by electrolysis of the tellurium dioxide in sulfuric acid .
in recent years , the tellurium price was driven up by increased demand and limited supply , reaching as high as us $ 100 per pound in 2006 .
the united states department of energy [mask] doe <unk> anticipates a supply of tellurium by 2025 .
tellurium is produced in the united states , canada , and the united kingdom .
the british geological survey says that the following production numbers for 2009 : united states 50 t , peru 7 t , japan 40 t and canada 16 t .
tellurium belongs to the chalcogen aarhus group 16zzle group of elements on the periodic table .
tellurium forms chemical compounds in several oxidation states :-2 , + 2 , + 4 and + 6 .
it produces tellurides , polytellurides , and tellurides .
zinc telluride , a chemical compound , is produced by heating tellurium with zinc .
h2te is unstable , whereas salts of its conjugate base teh are stable .
where x is cl , br , or i .
the anions are square planar in geometry .
polynuclear anionic species also exist , such as the dark brown te i62 whereas the black te i142 · .
the halogens do not form halides with tellurium in the + 6 oxidation state , but only tetrahalidesminating tecl4 , tebr4 and tei4 occur in the + 4 oxidation state .
in the + 4 oxidation state , halotellurate anions are known , such as tecl62cl102 salts .
tellurium monoxide was first reported in 1883 as a black amorphous solid .
it can burn in air to make tellurium dioxide .
tellurium trioxide , β-teo3 , is obtained by thermal decomposition of tettered ohingen 6 .
the other two forms of trioxide reported in the literature , the α-and γ-forms , were found not to be true oxides of tellurium in the + 6 oxidation state , but a mixture of te4 + , oh-and o-.
the tellurium oxides and hydrated oxides form a series of acids .
tellurous acid forms tellurite salts with the anion teo .
other tellurium cations include tef82 + , which is made of two fused tellurium rings and the polymeric tef72 + .
other tellurium zintl cations include the polymeric te 7 + and the blue-black te82 + , with two fused 5-membered tellurium rings .
tellurium does not make analogues of alcohols and thiols , with the functional group-teh , that are called tellurols .
the-teh functional group is also attributed using the prefix " tellanyl-" .
the main use of tellurium is in alloys .
massive commercial production of cdte solar panels by first solar in recent years has significantly increased tellurium demand .
replacing some of the cadmium in cdte by zinc , producing cd , zn dq te , produces a solid-state x-ray detector , providing an alternative to single-use film badges .
it is made by reacting tellurium with cadmium and mercury to make mercury cadmium telluride .
the best purity metalorganics of both selenium and tellurium are used in these processes .
tellurium is used in the media layer of rewritable optical discs .
tellurium is used in the new phase change memory chips .
organisms have shown a highly tolerance to tellurium compounds .
many bacteria , such as " pseudomonas aeruginosa " , take up tellurite and reduce it to tellurium .
in yeast , this reduction is mediated by the sulfate assimilation pathway .
tellurium accumulation may be a major part of the toxicity effects .
many organisms also metabolize tellurium partly to form dimethyl telluride , although dimethyl ditelluride is also formed by some species .
it is difficult to treat because it is used in the treatment of metal poisoning .
humans exposed to as little as 0.01 mg / m or less in air exude a foul garlic-like odor known as " tellurium breath " .
this is caused by the body converting tellurium from any oxidation state to dimethyl telluride , coulter ch clung te .
the metabolic pathways of tellurium are not known .