a pencil is a tool for writing or drawing .
pencils make marks by physical abrasion .
they are different from pens , which dispense liquid or gel ink onto the marked surface .
most pencils are made of graphite powder mixed with clay .
graphite pencils contain grey or black marks that are easily erased , but otherwise resistant to water , most chemicals , ultraviolet radiation and natural aging .
other types of pencil cores are used for drawing and sketching .
coloured pencils are sometimes used by teachers or editors to correct submitted texts , but are usually regarded as art supplies .
grease pencils have a soft , crayon-like waxy core that can leave marks on smooth surfaces such as glass or porcelain .
the most common pencil casing is thin wood , usually hexagonal in section but sometimes cylindrical or triangular , permanently bonded to the core .
casings may be of other materials , such as plastic or paper .
to use the casing must be carved or peeled off to expose the working end of the core as a sharp point .
they support separate , mobile pigment cores that can be extended or retracted through the casing 's tip as needed .
these casings can be reloaded with new coresailing usually graphite inspection as the previous ones are exhausted .
" pencil " is latin for " a little tail " droplets " .
the stylus was a thin metal stick made from wax .
as a technique for drawing , the closest predecessor to the pencil was silverpoint until around 1565 indicate as early as 1500 yd .
it could easily be sawn into sticks .
it remains the only large-scale deposit of graphite ever found in this solid form .
the substance was thought to be a form of lead .
consequently , it was called plumbago .
the black core of the pencil is still referred to as " lead " .
the words for pencil in germantown " bleistift " egypt , irishtown " peann luaidhe " coincidentally , arabic greenberg قلم رصاص " qalam rasas " , and some other languages literally mean " lead pen " .
the mines were taken over by the crown and guarded .
when sufficient stocks of graphite had been accumulated , the mines were flooded to prevent theft until more was required .
graphite was used for pencils , but graphite was smuggled out .
the news of the usefulness of these early pencils spread far and wide , attracting the attention of artists all over the known world .
because graphite is soft , it requires some form of encasement .
graphite sticks were wrapped in string or in sheepskin for stability .
england had a monopoly on the making of pencils until a method of reconstituting the graphite powder was found in 1662 in italy .
however , the distinctively square english pencils continued to be made with sticks cut from natural graphite into the 1860s .
the town of keswick , near the original findings of block graphite , still manufactures pencils .
the meaning of graphite writing implement apparently evolved late in the 16th century .
around 1560 , an italian couple named simonio and lyndiana bernacotti made the first blueprints for the modern carpentry pencil .
it was a flat , oval , more compact type of pencil .
they did this by putting out a stick of juniper wood .
shortly thereafter , a superior technique was discovered : two wooden halves were carved , a graphite stick inserted , and the halves then glued together , essentially the same method in use to this day .
the first attempt to make graphite sticks was in 1662 in nuremberg , germany .
it used to make graphite , sulfur dioxide , and antimony .
english and german pencils were not available to the french during the napoleonic wars .
france was also unable to import the inferior german graphite pencil substitute .
it was an officer in napoleon 's army to change this .
in 1795 , nicolas jacques conte discovered a method of mixing powdered graphite with clay and forming the mixture into rods that were then fired in a kiln .
by changing the ratio of graphite to clay , the hardness of the graphite rod could also be varied .
this method of making , which had been earlier discovered by the austrian joseph hardtmuth , the founder of koh-i-noor in 1790 , remains in use .
in 1802 , the making of graphite was made by the koh-i-noor company in vienna .
in england , pencils continued to be made from sawn graphite .
henry bessemer 's first successful invention invention invention invention invention invention invention invention invention invention invention 1838 忠 was a method of compressing graphite powder into solid graphite so the waste from sawing to be reused .
american colonists imported pencils from europe until after the american revolution .
george washington used a three-inch pencil when he surveyed the ohio country in 1762 .
william munroe , a cabinetmaker in concord , massachusetts , made the first american wood pencils in 1812 .
this was not the only pencil making in concord .
this invention was prompted by his father 's pencil factory in concord , which employed graphite found in new hampshire in 1821 by charles dunbar .
munroe 's method of making pencils was painstakingly slow , and in the neighbouring town of acton , a pencil mill owner named ebenezer wood set out to automate the process at his own pencil mill located at nashoba brook .
he used the first circular saw in pencil making .
he made the first of the hexagon-and octagon-shaped wooden casings .
ebenezer did not patent his invention and shared his ideas with anyone .
eberhard faber of new york , who was the leader in pencil production , helped create the first pencil factory in the united states .
joseph dixon , an inventor and entrepreneur involved with the tantiusques graphite mine in sturbridge , massachusetts , developed a means to mass-produce pencils .
by 1870 , the joseph dixon crucible company was the world 's largest dealer and consumer of graphite .
by the late 1800s , over 240,000 pencils were used each day in the united states .
the favoured timber for pencils was red cedar as it was aromatic and did not splinter when sharpened .
in the early 20th century supplies of red cedar were cut down so that pencil manufacturers were forced to recycle the wood from cedar fences and barns to keep the supply .
during world war ii rotary pencil sharpeners were outlawed in britain because they wasted so much scarce lead and wood , and pencils had to be sharpened in the more conservative manner — with knives .
incense cedar , when dyed and perfumed to look like red cedar , was a good alternative and most pencils today are made from this timber which is grown in managed forests .
it is made in the world by the end of the year .
it is less popular than cedar .
in southeast asia , the wood jelutong may be used to create pencils whilst the use of this rainforest species is controversial .
environmentalists prefer the use of pulai – another wood native to the region and used in pencil manufacturing .
lipman was the first person to put a pencil in a paper on 30 march 1858 .
lipman sold his patent to joseph reckendorfer in 1862 .
in 1875 , the supreme court of the united states ruled against reckendorfer declaring the patent invalid .
historian henry petroski notes that while ever more efficient means of mass production of pencils has driven the replacement cost of a pencil down , before this people would continue to use even the stub of a pencil .
for those who " did not feel comfortable using a stub , pencil extenders were sold .
the pencil stub can be inserted into the end of a shaft . . extenders were especially common among engineers and draftsmen , whose favourite pencils were priced dearly .
the use of an extender also means that the pencil does not change its heft as it wears down . "
artists currently use extenders to maximize the use of their colored pencils .
a standard , # 2 , hexagonal pencil is 19 cm long .
there are also pencils which use mechanical methods to push lead through a hole at the end .
these can be divided into two groups : propelling pencils use an internal mechanism to push the lead out from an internal compartment .
the erasershesis sometimes replaced by a sharpener on pencils with larger lead sizes .
they are popular for their longevity .
lead types are based on grade and size .
the product is also known as bensia pencils , stackable pencils or non-sharpening pencils .
it is a type of pencil .
the tip is removed by pulling it from the writing end of the body and inserting it into the open-ended bottom of the body , thereby pushing a new tip to the top .
the plastic pencil was made by empire inc . in 1969 and then by arthur d . little for empire from 1969 through the early 1970s .
these pencils were made from plastic , which would be a graphite .
residual graphite from a pencil stick is not poisonous .
lead poisoning from pencils was not uncommon .
until the middle of the 20th century the paint used for the outer coating could contain high concentrations of lead .
the lead is a mix of graphite and clay powders .
before the two substances are mixed , they are separately cleaned of foreign matter and dried in a manner that creates large square cakes .
the clay squares are mixed together with water .
the amount of clay content added to the graphite depends on the intended pencil hardness .
then the mixture is heated in a kiln .
the resulting strings are dipped in oil or molten wax , which seeps into the tiny holes of the material and allows for smooth writing .
a juniper or incense-cedar plank with several long parallel grooves is cut to make a " slat " .
another grooved plank is glued on top , and the whole assembly is then cut into individual pencils , which are then varnished or painted .
many pencils have an eraser on the top and so the process is usually considered incomplete at this point .
each pencil has a shoulder cut on one end of the pencil .
a rubber plug is then inserted into the ferrule to the end of the pencil .
graphite pencils are made from clay and graphite .
there is a wide range of grades available , mainly for artists who are interested in creating a full range of tones from light grey to black .
engineers prefer harder pencils which allow for more control in the shape of the lead .
there is no common standard .
two pencils of the same grade but different manufacturers will not always make a mark of identical tone nor have the same hardness .
most manufacturers , and almost all in europe , call their pencils with the letters " h " skulls commonly " blackness " representing commonly " blackness " representing commonly " blackness " representing representing commonly " blackness " representing representing " f " jia " .
also known as “ firm ” in japanenay .
the standard writing pencil is graded " hb " .
brookman , an english pencil maker , first used this name in the early 20th century .
a pencil 's grade was described by a sequence or successive hs or bs such as " bb " and " bbb " for successively softer leads , and " hh " for successively harder ones .
the koh-i-noor hardtmuth pencil manufacturers claim to have first used the hb designations , with " h " standing for hardtmuth , " b " for the company 's location of budejovice , and " f " for franz hardtmuth , who was responsible for technological improvements in pencil making .
as of 2009 , a set of pencils ranging from a very soft , black-marking pencil to a very hard , light-marking pencil usually ranges from softest to hardest as follows : koh-i-noor offers twenty grades from 10h to 8b for its 1500 series ; mitsubishi pencil offers twenty-two grades from 10 , and produces unmoh for its range from 10,000 to 24,000 pencils for its range from 20,000 st .
numbers as designation were first used by conte and later by john thoreau , father of henry david thoreau , in the 19th century .
although conte / thoreau 's equivalence table is widely accepted , not all manufacturers follow it ; for example , faber-castell uses a different equivalence table in its " grip 2001 " pencils : 1 = 2b , 2 = b , 2 = b , 2 = 1,3 = hb , 4 = 2h .
graded pencils can be used for a very fast test .
this test defines a " pencil hardness " of a coating as the grade of the hardest pencil that does not permanently mark the coating when pressed firmly against it at a 45 degree angle .
for standardized measurements , there are mohs hardness testing pencils on the market .
most pencils made in the us are yellow .
this tradition began in 1890 when the l . & c . hardtmuth company of austria-hungary introduced their koh-i-noor brand , named after the famous diamond .
at a time when most pencils were either painted in dark colours or not at all , the koh-i-noor was yellow .
it was suggested that the colour of the orient at a time when the best-quality graphite came from siberia .
other companies copied the yellow colour so that their pencils would be associated with this high quality brand .
not all countries use yellow pencils .
german and brazilian pencils , for example , are often green , blue or black .
in southern europe , pencils tend to be dark red or black with yellow lines .
in india , the most common pencil colour scheme was dark red with black lines , and pencils with a large number of colour schemes are produced by various companies .
pencils are usually round , hexagonal , or sometimes triangular in section .
carpenters ' pencils are usually oval or rectangular , so they rarely roll away during work .
the table lists the prominent manufacturers of wood-cased stupidity including wood-free reuters pencils around the world .
