the miocene is the first geological epoch of the neogene period .
its name comes from the greek words ‘ ‘ , “ less ” ” ” and “ separately ” .
the miocene is preceded by the oligocene and is followed by the pliocene .
as the earth went from the oligocene through the miocene and into the pliocene , the climate slowly cooled towards a series of ice ages .
the miocene boundaries are not set aside a single global event .
the apes first appeared , and diversified during the early miocene .
by the end of this epoch and the start of the following one , the ancestors of humans had split away from the ancestors of the chimpanzees to follow their own evolutionary path during the final messinian stage litter .
as in the oligocene before it , grasslands continued to expand and forests to less extent .
in the seas of the miocene , kelp forests made their first appearance and soon became one of earth 's most productive ecosystems .
the plants and animals of the miocene were modern .
mammals and birds existed from the middle ages to the early middle ages .
whales , seals , and kelp spread .
the miocene is of particular interest to geologists and palaeoclimatologists as major phases of the geology of the himalaya occurred during the miocene , affecting monsoonal patterns in asia , which were interlinked with glacial periods in the northern hemisphere .
land mammal ages are mammalized .
land mammal ages are mammals that live in north america .
land mammal ages are land mammal types .
continents continued to drift toward their present positions .
of the modern geologic features , only the land bridge between south america and north america was absent .
mountain building took place in western north america , europe , and east asia .
both continental and miocene deposits are common worldwide .
well studied continental exposures occur in the north american great plains and in argentina .
india continued to collide with asia , creating new mountain ranges .
the tethys seaway continued to shrink and then disappeared as africa collided with eurasia in the turkish – arabian region between 19 and 12 million years ago .
the subsequent uplift of mountains in the western mediterranean region and a global fall in sea levels combined to cause a temporary drying up of the mediterranean sea strata known as the messinian salinity crisis coined near the end of the miocene .
the global trend was towards increasing dryity caused primarily by global cooling reducing the ability of the atmosphere to absorb moisture .
uplift of east africa in the late miocene was partly responsible for the shrinking of tropical rain forests in that region .
during the oligocene and early miocene the coast of northern brazil , colombia , south-central peru , central chile and large swathes of inland patagonia were subject to a marinession .
the steadily rising central part of the andes is an exception .
there are many lines of oligo-miocene transgressions around the world .
it is thought that the oligo-miocene transgression in patagonia could have temporarily linked the pacific and atlantic oceans .
connection would have occurred through narrow epicontinental seaways that formed channels in a dissected topography .
the antarctic plate began to subduct beneath south america 14 million years ago in the miocene , forming the chile triple junction .
at first the antarctic plate subducted in the southernmost tip of patagonia , meaning that the chile triple junction was near the strait of magellan .
as the southern part of nazca plate and the chile rise became consumed by subduction the more northerly regions of the antarctic plate begun to subduct beneath patagonia so that the chile triple junction advanced to the north over time .
the asthenospheric window disturbed previous patterns of mantle convection beneath patagonia inducing an uplift of ca . 1 km that reversed the oligocene – miocene transgression .
as the southern andes rose in the middle miocene epochs 14 – 12 million years ago .
the slow global cooling led to the pleistocene glaciations continued .
there is evidence of a warm period during the miocene .
the warming began 21 million years ago and lasted until 14 million years ago .
by 8 million years ago , temperatures dropped sharply once again , and the antarctic ice sheet was already approaching its present-day size and thickness .
greenland may have large glaciers as early as 7 to 8 million years ago .
during the miocene epoch was mostly supported by the two newly formed biomes , kelp forests and grasslands .
grasslands allow more grazers , such as horses , rhinoceroses , and hippos .
ninety-five percent of modern plants existed by the end of this epoch .
there was a big expansion of grass-grazer ecosystems , with roaming herds of large , swift grazers pursued by predators across broad sweeps of open grasslands , displacing woodland , and browsers .
the higher organic content and water retention of the deeper and richer grassland soils , with long-term burial of carbon in sediments , produced a carbon and water vapor sink .
this combined with higher surface albedo and lower evapotranspiration of grassland , contributed to a cooler , drier climate .
c grasses , which are able to assimilate carbon dioxide and water more efficiently than c grasses , expanded to become ecologically significant near the end of the miocene between 6 and 7 million years ago .
the expansion of grasslands and radiations between terrestrial herbivores is the same as fluctuations in co .
cycads between 11.5 and 5 million years ago began to rediversify after previous declines in variety due to climatic changes .
eucalyptus fossil leaves occur in the miocene of new zealand , where the genus is not native today , but have been introduced from australia .
