pat cadiganʲ -lrb- born september 10,1953 -rrb- is an american science fiction author .
her novels and short stories all share a common theme of exploring the relationship between the human mind and technology .
cadigan was born in schenectady , new york .
she studied at the university of massachusetts and the university of kansas gravitational arts .
cadigan met her first husband , rufus cadigan while in college .
she also worked for fantasy writer tom reamy at his nickelodeon graphics typesetting .
cadigan worked as a writer for kansas city 's hallmark cards .
she also edited the small press fantasy and science fiction magazines " chacal " and later " shayol " with her husband , arnie fenner .
cadigan sold her first professional science fiction story in 1980 .
she is married to her third husband , christopher fowlertify .
she became a british citizen in 2014 .
cadigan 's first novel , " mindplayers " , was about the same thing .
her second novel , " synners " , was about the same theme .
she also worked in this exploration of the speculative relationship between technology and the perceptions of the human mind .
cadigan has won a number of awards .
the book was presented at lonestarcon 3 , the 71st world science fiction convention .
robert a . heinlein , in part , dedicated his novel " friday " to her .
cadigan and his girlfriend invented a whole secret life in which we were twins from the planet venus , " she told national public radio .
the beatles asked the beatles to help their songs and how to deal with fame and other important matters , cadigan says .
they asked us to use our highly developed ability to become them , and finish recording sessions and concert tours when they were too tired to go on themselves .
the venusian twins had other superpowers , that they would sometimes use to help superman , wonder woman and other heroes , she said .
cadigan was diagnosed with cancer in 2013 .
one of her early stories appeared in " rock on "wyla 1981tify 1981 iaaf , and in 1998 she contributed an original story to the collection " disco 2000 " .
