the melbourne grand prix circuit is a street circuit around albert park lake , only a few kilometres south of central melbourne .
it is used once a year as a racetrack for the australian grand prix , supercars championship melbourne 400 and associated support races .
the circuit has an fia grade 1 licence .
although the entire track consists of normally public roads , each sector includes medium to high speed characteristics .
the circuit also has characteristics of a street circuit 's enclosed nature due to concrete barriers annually built along the lakeside drive curve , in particular , where run-off is not available due to the proximity of the lake shore .
the current contract for the grand prix ends in 2023 .
tobacco advertising has been banned since 2007 .
the circuit uses everyday sections of road that circle albert park lake .
the roads that are used were rebuilt prior to the first race in 1996 to ensure consistency and smoothness .
as a result , the albert park track has quite a smooth surface .
before 2007 there was only a few other places on the formula 1 calendar with a body of water close to the track .
many of the new tracks , such as valencia , singapore and abu dhabi are close to a body of water .
the course is considered to be quite fast and relatively easy to drive .
the flat terrain around the lake , coupled with a track design that features few true straights , means that the track is not easy to pass .
each year , most of the trackside fencing , pedestrian overpasses , grandstands and other motorsport infrastructure are erected approximately two months before the grand prix weekend .
land around the circuit included a large aquatic centre , a golf course , a lakeside stadium , some restaurants and rowing boathouses .
some maintain a silent protest against the event .
nevertheless , the event is popular in melbourne and australia .
middle park , the home of south melbourne fc was demolished in 1994 .
on 4 july 2008 , the official f1 siteference formula1 . com reported that more than 300,000 people attended the four-day melbourne grand prix .
the grand prix will continue until at least 2020 .
there has never been a night race at albert park , however , the 2009 and 2010 events both started at 5 : 00 pm local time .
during the nine months of the year , most of the track can be driven by ordinary street-registered vehicles either clockwise or anti-clockwise .
only the sections between turns 3,4 and 5 , then 5 and 6 , differ from the race track configuration .
it was replaced by a car park access road .
between turns 5 and 6 , the road is blocked .
it is possible to drive from turn 5 on to albert road and back on to the track at turn 7 though two sets of lights control the flow of this option .
the only set of lights on the track is halfway between turns 12 and 13 .
the chicanes at turns 11 and 12 are much more open than that used in the grand prix .
turn 9 is also a car park .
the speed limit is generally 40 km / h , while some short sections have a speed limit of 50 km / h , which is still slower than an f1 car under pit lane speed restrictions .
the back of the track , turns 7 to 13 .
double lines separate the two-way traffic along most of lakeside drive with short road islands approximately every 50 metres .
black swans live and breed in albert park .
about 80 % of the track edge is lined with short parkland-style chain-linked fencing leaving normal drivers less room for error than f1 drivers have during race weekend .
there is a large shoulder room between the outside of each lane and the fencing .
albert park has the distinction of being the only venue to host the australian grand prix in both world championship and non-world championship formats with an earlier configuration of the current circuit used for the race on two occasions during the 1950s .
during this time racing was conducted in an anti-clockwise direction as opposed to the current circuit clockwise .
as of march 2018 .
