the gettysburg address is a speech by president abraham lincoln delivered during the american civil war .
it is one of the most famous speeches in the history of the united states .
not even the day 's primary speech , lincoln 's carefully crafted address came to be seen as one of the greatest and most influential statements of american national purpose .
lincoln said that all men are created equal , and that all men are created equal , " and that the civil war was a test that would be a test that would be a nation .
he extolled the sacrifices of those who died at gettysburg in defense of those principles .
despite the prominent place of the speech in the popular culture of the united states , its exact wording is disputed .
the five known manuscripts of the gettysburg address are different in a number of details .
neither is it clear where stood the platform from which lincoln delivered the address .
modern scholarship locates the speakers ' platform 40 yards shorter than the traditional site in soldiers ' national cemetery at the soldiers ' national monument .
after the battle of gettysburg on july 1 – 3,1863 , the union army took over the soldiers from the soldiers in the cemetery at gettysburg .
in inviting president lincoln to the ceremonies , david wills , of the committee for the november 19 consecration of the national cemetery at gettysburg , wrote , " it is the desire that , after the oration , you , as chief executive of the nation , formally set apart these grounds to their sacred use by a few appropriate remarks . "
on the train trip from washington , d . c . to gettysburg , on november 18 , lincoln was accompanied by three members of his cabinet , william seward , john usher and montgomery blair , several foreign officials , his secretary john nicolay , and his assistant secretary , john hay .
on the morning of november 19 , lincoln said that he was dizzy .
hay said that during the speech lincoln 's face had " a ghastly color " and that he was " sad , mournful , almost haggard . "
after the speech , when lincoln was on the 6 : 30 pm train for washington , dc , he was feverish and weak , with a severe headache .
after a long illness , the disease had a vesicular rash .
lincoln was in the prodromal period of smallpox when he delivered the gettysburg address .
lincoln 's short speech was one of the best examples of english public speeches .
standing beneath this serene sky , overlooking these fields now reposing from the labors of the waning year , the mighty alleghenies towering before us , the graves of our brethren beneath our feet , it is with hesitation that i raise my poor voice to break the eloquent silence of god and nature .
but the duty to which you have called me must be performed .
but they , i am sure , will join us in saying , as we say farewell to the dust of these martyr-heroes , that wheresoever throughout the civilized world the accounts of this great warfare are read , and down to the latest period of recorded time , in the glorious annals of our common country , there will be no brighter page than that which relates the battles of gettysburg .
long dedication addresses like everett 's were common at cemeteries in this era .
the tradition began in 1831 when justice joseph story delivered the dedication address at mount auburn cemetery in cambridge , massachusetts .
those addresses linked cemeteries to the mission of union .
lincoln 's address followed the oration of the gettysburg address in his 1864 book about the event commissioners " address of the hon . edward everett at the consecration of the national cemetery at gettysburg , 19th november 1863 , with the dedicatory speech of president lincoln , and the other exercises of the origin of the cemetery . "
after everett 's well-received speech , lincoln spoke for only a few minutes .
with a " few appropriate remarks " , he was able to summarize his view of the war in just ten sentences .
modern scholars disagree with its exact wording , and modern versions printed in newspaper accounts of the event .
of these versions , the bliss version , written well after the speech as a favor for a friend , is seen by many as the standard text .
its text differs , however , from the written versions prepared by lincoln before and after his speech .
it is the only version lincoln put his signature on .
garry wills , in " lincoln at gettysburg " , garry wills , notes the parallels between lincoln 's speech and pericles 's funeral oration during the peloponnesian war as described by thucydides .
mcpherson notes this connection in his review of wills ' book .
gore vidal also draws attention to this link in a bbc documentary about oration .
in " the new yorker " , he said that everett 's oration was explicitly neoclassical , referring directly to marathon and pericles , " lincoln 's rhetoric is , instead , deliberately biblical .
it is difficult to find a very classical reference in any of his speeches .
lincoln had mastered the sound of the king james bible so completely that he could recast abstract issues of constitutional law in biblical terms .
lincoln 's " government of the people , by the people , for the people " has been there since then .
there is no evidence that the story of john wycliffe was translated into english from 1384 .
craig r . smith , in " criticism of political rhetoric and disciplinary integrity " , suggested that lincoln 's view of the government as expressed in the gettysburg address was influenced by the speech of massachusetts senator daniel webster , the " second reply to hayne " , in which webster famously famously famously thundered liberty and union , now and forever , one and inseparable ! "
in this speech on january 26,1830 , webster described the federal government as : " made for the people , made by the people , and answerable to the people " , foreshadowing lincoln 's " government of the people , by the people , for the people , for the people , for the people , for the people " .
webster also said , " this government , sir , is the independent offspring of the popular will .
it is not the creature of state legislatures .
lincoln was certainly familiar with chief justice john marshall 's opinion in " mcculloch v . maryland " 1819 c1 c1 c1 c1 .
chief justice marshall said : " the government of the union , thenbled whatever may be the influence of this fact on the case .
in form , it emanates from them .
its powers are granted by them .
lincoln , a lawyer and president engaged in the greatest struggle of federalism , was yoko onortebrately echoing the preeminent case that had solidified federal power over the states .
wills observed lincoln 's use of the imagery of birth , life , and death in reference to a nation " brought forth " , " conceived " , and that shall not " perish " .
others suggested that lincoln 's version " four score and seven " was about the king james version of the bible 's , in which man 's lifespan is given as " three years and ten ; and if by reason of strength they be fourscore years " .
lincoln was probably influenced by lajos kossuth , the formerly governor of hungary .
all for the people and all by the people .
nothing about the people — that is democracy !
each of the five manuscript copies of the gettysburg address is named for the person who received it from lincoln .
lincoln gave some of his private secretaries , john nicolay and john hay to make a copy of his secretary .
both of these were written around the time of his november 19 address .
this is partly because lincoln gave it a title and signed and dated it .
lincoln 's son , robert todd lincoln , made nicolay and hay a custodian of lincoln 's papers in 1874 .
after being in a newspaper written by nicolay in 1894 , the nicolay copy was probably among the papers passed to hay by nicolay 's daughter helen when nicolay died in 1901 .
robert lincoln began a search for the original copy in 1908 .
the hay draft was different from the gettysburg address printed by nicolay in 1894 in many important ways .
this is to protect the documents from oxidation .
the nicolay copy is often called the " first draft " .
scholars disagree over whether the nicolay copy was actually the copy lincoln read at gettysburg on november 19 .
in an 1894 article , nicolay , who had become the custodian of lincoln 's papers , wrote that lincoln had brought to gettysburg the first part of the speech written in ink on executive mansion stationery , and that he had written the second page in pencil on lined paper before the dedication on november 19 .
matching folds can be seen on the two pages , suggesting it could be the copy that eyewitnesses say lincoln took from his pocket and read at the ceremony .
others believe that the delivery text has been lost .
the nicolay draft has been the reading copy , either the contemporary transcriptions were not correct , or lincoln would have had to depart from his written text in several instances .
this copy of the gettysburg address was still in john nicolay 's possession until his death in 1901 .
it was used to be on display as part of the american treasures exhibition of the library of congress in washington , d . c .
the hay copy was first announced in 1906 , after the search for the " original manuscript " of the address among the papers of john hay brought it to light .
there are many omissions and inserts in lincoln 's own hand .
in this copy , like in the nicolay copy , the words " under god " are not present .
it is sometimes referred to as the " second draft " .
the " hay copy " was made either after lincoln came back to washington .
those who believe that it was completed on the morning of his address point to the fact that it contains some phrases that are not in the first draft but are in the reports of the address as delivered and in later copies made by lincoln .
lincoln held this second draft when he delivered the address .
lincoln gave this copy to hay , whose descendants gave it and the nicolay copy to the library of congress in 1916 .
the everett copy was a copy sent by president lincoln to edward everett in early 1864 .
everett was collecting the speeches at the gettysburg dedication into one book to sell for the benefit of stricken soldiers at new york 's sanitary commission fair .
the draft lincoln sent became the third autograph copy .
the bancroft copy of the gettysburg address was written by president lincoln in february 1864 .
bancroft planned to include this copy in " autograph leaves of our country 's authors " , which he planned to sell at a soldiers ' and sailors ' sanitary fair in baltimore .
therefore , bancroft was allowed to keep it .
it is the only one with both letters from lincoln with the letter .
this copy remained in the bancroft family for many years .
it is now held by the division of rare and manuscript collections in the carl a . kroch library at cornell university .
it is the only one of the five copies to be privately owned .
lincoln found that his fourth written copy could not be used .
the bliss copy is named for colonel alexander bliss , bancroft 's stepson and publisher of " autograph leaves " .
the gettysburg address was not known to have been a copy of the gettysburg address .
because of this , it has become the standard version of the gettysburg address .
it is the version that is on the south wall of the lincoln memorial .
today , it is displayed in the lincoln room of the white house .
he was a rich collector of art and manuscripts .
the castro government claimed cintas ' properties after the cuban revolution in 1959 .
garry wills concluded the bliss copy " is stylistically preferable to others in one significant way : lincoln removed ' here ' from ' that cause for which they reeling here ' is in all other versions of the speech .
he said that lincoln was concerned with a perfected text than with an ' original ' one .
the albert h . small documents gallery at the smithsonian institution national museum of american history hosted a limited public viewing of the bliss copy , with the support of then-first lady laura bush .
the museum also launched an online exhibition and gallery .
another source of the gettysburg address is the copy from the copy taken by reporter joseph l . gilbert .
it is different from the drafted text in a number of minor ways .
eyewitnesses reports about lincoln 's performance vary .
in 1931,87-year-old mrs . sarah a . cooke myers suggested that there was a dignified silence after lincoln 's speech .
there was a impressive silence like our menallen friends meeting .
there was no applause when he stopped speaking .
historian shelby foote , after lincoln 's presentation , the applause was delayed , scattered , and " barely polite " .
in contrast , pennsylvania governor andrew gregg curtin said , " he pronounced that speech in a voice that all the multitude heard .
the crowd was lowered into silence because the president stood before them .
it was the common remark of everybody .
such a speech , as they said it was ! "
reinterment of soldiers ' remains from field graves into the cemetery was less than half complete on the day of the ceremony .
lincoln turned to his bodyguard ward hill lamon and said that his speech , like a bad plow , " won ' t scour " .
garry wills , this statement has no basis in fact .
garry wills said that " had done what he wanted to do " .
in a letter to lincoln written the following day , everett gave a speech saying " i should be glad if i could flatter myself that i came as near to the central idea of the occasion , in two hours , as you did in two minutes " .
lincoln said that he was glad to know the speech was not a " total failure " .
other public reaction to the speech was different from partisan lines .
the " chicago times " said , " the cheek of every american must tingle with shame as he reads the silly , flat and dishwatery utterances of the man who has to be pointed out to intelligent foreigners as the president of the united states . "
in contrast , the republican " new york times " praised the speech .
in massachusetts , the " springfield republican " also printed the entire speech .
the republican said that lincoln 's short remarks would " repay further study as the model speech " .
on the sesquicentennial of the address , " the patriot-news " of harrisburg , pennsylvania , formerly the " patriot & union " , retracted its original reaction .
the " patriot & union " did not recognize the speech 's importance , timeless eloquence , and lasting significance .
the " patriot-news " regrets the error . "
foreign newspapers also criticized lincoln 's remarks .
" the times " of london said : " the ceremony at gettysburg was made fun of some of the luckless sallies of that poor president lincoln . "
congressman joseph a . goulden , then an eighteen-year-old school teacher , was present and heard the speech .
he served in the united states marine corps during the war .
in his later life , goulden was often asked about the speech .
lincoln gave a speech about the event and lincoln 's speech in favorable terms .
goulden 's recollections included remarks to the house of representatives in 1914 .
william r . rathvon is the only known eyewitness of both lincoln 's arrival at gettysburg and the address to have left an audio recording of his recollections which can be found here .
one year before his death in 1939 , rathvon 's reminiscences were recorded on february 12,1938 at the boston studios of radio station wrul .
the title of the record was " i heard lincoln that day-william r . rathvon , tr productions " .
a copy wound at national public radio biennale npr coulter gave npr ¥ 3858888888888888888888 , during a " quest for sound " project in 1999 .
this link is about the story , but it can no longer play it .
like most people who came to gettysburg , the rathvon family knew that lincoln was going to make some remarks .
the family went to the town square where the procession was to go out to the cemetery that had not been completed yet .
at the head of the procession , lincoln was the first young boy had ever seen .
rathvon describes lincoln as so tall and with such long legs that they went almost to the ground .
rathvon then explains how lincoln stepped forward and " with a manner serious almost to sadness , gave his brief address . "
during the delivery , along with some other boys , young rathvon showed his way forward through the crowd until he stood within 15 feet of mr . lincoln and looked up into what he described as lincoln 's " serious face " .
rathvon says that , although he listened " couldn to every word the president uttered and heard it clearly " , he explains , " boylike , i could not recall any of it afterwards " .
but he says that if anyone said anything disparaging about " honest abe " , there would have been a " junior battle of gettysburg " .
in the recording rathvon speaks of lincoln 's speech " echoing through the hills " .
the only known and confirmed photograph of lincoln at gettysburg was taken by david bachrach in 1952 .
lincoln 's speech was short , but he and the other people sat for hours during the rest of the program .
given the length of everett 's speech and the length of time it took for 19th century photographers to get " set up " before taking a picture , it is likely that the photographers were ill-prepared for the brevity of lincoln 's remarks .
the nicolay and hay copies of the three later copies showed in everett , bancroft , and bliss ono .
so , some people say that lincoln did not say the words " under god " at gettysburg .
at least three reporters telegraphed the text of lincoln 's speech on the day the address was given with the words " under god " included .
the reporters present included joseph gilbert , charles hale , charles hale , john r . youngenay , who later became the librarian of congressigraphy , from the " philadelphia press " , and reporters from the " cincinnati commercial " , " new york tribune " , and " the new york times " .
charles hale had notebook and pencil in hand , and took down the slow-spoken words of the president . "
" he took down what he said was the exact language of lincoln 's address , and his declaration was as good as the oath of a court stenographer .
his associates confirmed his testimony , which was received , as it deserved to be , at its face value . "
lincoln probably spoke differently from his prepared text and added the expression when he spoke .
it was an uncharacteristically spontaneous revision for a speaker who did not trust extemporaneous speech .
lincoln had added impromptu words in several earlier speeches , but always offered a later apology for the change .
in this instance , he did not .
lincoln included " under god " in all three copies of the address he prepared at later dates .
" under god " pointed backward and forward : back to " this nation " , which drew its breath from both political and religious sources , but also forward to a " new birth " .
lincoln had come to see the civil war as purification .
the old union had to die .
the old man had to die .
death changed from a new union and a new human .
the phrase " under god " was used frequently in works published before 1860 .
abraham lincoln gave the address which he had written in washington and revised after his arrival at gettysburg the evening of november 18 .
the taneytown road entrance is the rostrum and the lincoln address memorial .
neither of these is located within 300 yards of any of the five dynasties or moreegation claimed locations for the dedicatory platform .
colonel w . yates selleck was a marshal in the parade on consecration day and was seated on the platform when lincoln made the address .
selleck marked a map with the position of the platform .
a location which approximates this description is 39 °49.243 ′ n , 77 °13.869 ′ w .
only the crest presents a panoramic view of the battlefield .
there is a spectacular view from where the speech was noted .
the " kentucky memorial " is next to the soldiers ' national monument .
the soldiers ' national monument is still a credible location for the speech .
the article described the dividing lines between the state grave plots as " the radii of a common center , where a flag pole is now raised , but where it is proposed erect a national monument " .
with the inclusion of this quotation tilberg inadvertently verifies a central principle of future photographic analyses — a flagpole , rather than the speakers ' platform , occupied the central point of the soldiers ' graves .
the precision of the photo-analyses relies upon the coincidence of position between this temporary flag pole and the future monument .
confusing to today 's tourist , the " kentucky memorial " is contradicted by a newer marker which was erected nearby by the gettysburg national military park .
the national park service documents which pinpoint the location at the soldiers ' national monument have not been systematically revised since the placement of the newer marker .
some web pages are used for the " traditional site " .
the gettysburg national military parkwylg a markerhesis near hampson which states , " the speakers ' platform was located in evergreen cemetery to your left . "
the observer of this marker stands facing the fence which separates the two cemeteriesrrado one public and one private wrestler .
in 1982 , a park historian , kathleen georg harrison , first studied photographs and proposed a location in evergreen cemetery .
speaking for harrison without revealing details , two sources say her suggested location as " on or near the brown family vault " in evergreen cemetery .
william a . frassanito , a former military intelligence analyst , documented a comprehensive photographic analysis in 1995 .
according to frassanito , the living graves of israel yountropolis died 1892 parapet , john koch ( died 1913 torches , and george e . kitzmiller ( are among those which occupy the location of the 1863 speaker 's stand .
the gnmp marker , wills ' interpretation of harrison 's analysis , and the frassanito analysis concur that the platform was in private evergreen cemetery , rather than public soldiers ' national cemetery .
the national park service 's " national cemetery walking tour " brochure is one of the nps document .
the location of the speech was actually on the crown of this hill , a short distance on the other side of the iron fence and inside the evergreen cemetery .
the gnmp marker is unspecific , providing only " to your left " .
frassanito has written about 1 naacp records , 2 buddha 's own methods and 3 libretti a refutation of the harrison site , but neither the gnmp nor harrison has provided any documentation .
each of the three points to a location in evergreen cemetery .
the monument at the cemetery actually has nothing to do with lincoln or his famous speech .
its appreciation has been given by the thirst for a tidy home for the speech .
freeing the cemetery and monument to serve their original purpose , honoring union departed , is unlikely as a resolution to the location controversy and the erection of a public monument to the speech in the exclusively private evergreen cemetery .
the gettysburg address is still very important in american culture .
the gettysburg address is often referred to in works of popular culture .
it is often taught in classes about history or civics .
martin luther king , jr . 's famous speech of " i have a dream " spoke of the gettysburg address .
king was on the steps of the lincoln memorial in august 1963 .
this decree came as a great light of hope to millions of negro slaves who had been seared in the flames of withering injustice .
phrases from the address are often used in other works .
the constitution of france says that the principle of the french republic is " gouvernement du peuple , par le peuple et pour le peuple " .
sun yat-sen 's " three principles of the people " as well as the preamble for the 1947 constitution of japan were also inspired from that phrase .
the aircraft carrier has as its ship 's ship 's motto the phrase " shall not perish " .
senator charles sumner of massachusetts wrote of the address and its enduring presence in american culture after lincoln 's death in april 1865 : " that speech , uttered at the field of gettysburg . . and now sanctified by the martyrdom of its author , is a monumental act .
he said " the world will little note , nor long remember what we say here ; but it can never forget what they did here . "
the world at once noted what he said , and will never stop to remember it .
in july 1963 , president john f . kennedy said that the battle and lincoln 's speech was " five score years ago the ground on which we here stood aground under the clash of arms and was consecrated for all time by the blood of american manhood .
abraham lincoln , in dedicating this great battlefield , has expressed , in words too eloquent for paraphrase or summary , why this sacrifice was necessary .
kennedy was murdered three days after the gettysburg address centennial .
in 2015 , the abraham lincoln presidential library foundation made " gettysburg replies : the world responds to abraham lincoln 's gettysburg address " .
the work challenges leaders to craft 272 word responses to celebrate lincoln , the gettysburg address , or a related topic .
one of the replies was by astrophysicist neil degrasse tyson in which he made the point that one of lincoln 's greatest legacies was establishing , in the same year of the gettysburg address , the national academy of sciences , which had the longterm effect of " setting our nation on a course of scientifically enlightened governance without earth " .
lincoln quickly wrote the speech on the back of an envelope .
mary raymond shipman andrews paces , published in 1906 , was a book for generations of schoolchildren .
other lesser-known claims include harriet beecher stowe 's saying that lincoln had composed the address " in only a few moments " .
