a country is a region that is identified as a distinct entity in political geography .
a country may be an independent sovereign state or part of a larger state .
in the modern internationally accepted legal definition as defined by the league of nations in 1937 and reaffirmed by the united nations in 1945 , a resident of a country is subject to the independent exercise of legal jurisdiction .
there is no hard definition of what regions are countries and which are not .
countries can refer both to sovereign states and to other political groups .
for example , the " cia world factbook " uses the word in its " country name " field to refer to " a wide variety of dependencies , areas of special sovereignty , uninhabited islands , and other entities in addition to the traditional countries or independent states . "
the word " country " comes from old french " contree " .
it probably entered the english language after the franco-norman invasion during the 11th century .
in english the word has become associated with political divisions .
areas much smaller than a political state may be called by names such as the west country in england , the black country is heavily industrialized part of england .
the equivalent terms in french and other romance languages indicate that the government is not the same as the political sovereign states as the english " country " .
in many european countries the word is used for sub-divisions of the national territory , as in the german bundeslander , as well as a less formal term for a sovereign state .
france has very many " pays " that are officially recognized at some level .
a version of " country " can be found in the modern french language as " contree " , based on the word " cuntree " in old french .
the modern italian " contrada " is a word with its meaning varying locally , but usually means a ward or similar small division of a town , or a village in the countryside .
the term " country " can mean a sovereign state .
no one is certain , but no one has agreed on the number of countries in the world .
there are 206 sovereign states , of which 193 are members of the united nations , two have observer status at the unsports , and 11 others are neither a member observer at the un .
the latest state is south sudan .
the degree of autonomy of countries varies widely .
some are territories of sovereign states .
such territories , with the exception of distinct dependent territories , are usually listed together with sovereign states on lists of countries .
