any act of worship that follows the islamic rules of prayer can be said to create a mosque .
the pulpit aground , from which the friday sermonarded khutbakh is delivered , was earlier times characteristic of the central city mosque , but has become common in smaller mosques .
in modern times , they have kept their role as places of religious instruction and debate , but higher learning now generally takes place in specialized institutions .
special importance is accorded to the great mosque of mecca [mask] center of the hajjj khalifa , the prophet 's mosque in medina curiously burial place of muhammadciful and al-aqsa mosque in jerusalem .
in the past , many mosques in the muslim world were built over burial places of sufi saints and other venerated figures , which has turned them into popular pilgrimage destinations .
modern states in the muslim world have tried to bring mosques under government control .
many of the mosques serve as bases for different islamic revivalist currents and social activism .
islam started during the lifetime of muhammad in the 7th century ce .
in this case , either the mosque of the companions in the eritrean city of massawa , or the quba mosque in the hejazi city of medina medina medina showed the first mosque built by muhammad upon his emigration from mecca in 622 cerized .
according to another set of views , islam is a religion preceded by muhammad , representing even previous prophets such as abraham .
since 638 ad , the sacred mosque of mecca has been expanded to accommodate the increasing number of muslims who either live in the area or make the annual pilgrimage known as " hajjjj " to the city .
the " mihrab " and the " minbar " were built in the mosque .
mosques had been built in iraq and north africa by the end of the 7th century , as islam spread outside the arabian peninsula with early caliphates .
the mosque is one of the oldest mosques in iraq .
the mosque was the first mosque in egypt .
the great mosque of kairouan was the first mosque built in northwest africa .
those features can also be found in andalusian mosques , as they tended to reflect the architecture of the moors instead of their visigoth predecessors .
the first mosque in east asia was built in the 8th century in xi ' an .
the great mosque of xi ' an is like a pagoda .
mosques , including the demak great mosque , were first built in the 15th century .
the mosque was not in indonesia until the 19th century .
mosques were first established in india during the 7th century .
the mosques of mughal origin included onion domes , pointed arches , and elaborate circular minarets .
the umayyad caliphate was very important in spreading islam and establishing mosques within the levant .
the designs of the dome of the rock and the umayyad mosque were influenced by byzantine architecture .
several of the early mosques in the ottoman empire were originally churches or cathedrals from the byzantine empire .
mosques from the ottoman empire are still scattered across eastern europe .
many major european cities are home to mosques , like the grand mosque of paris .
as in europe , the number of american mosques has rapidly increased in recent decades as muslim immigrants , particularly from south asia , have come in the united states .
the towns captured by muslims had many of their churches converted to mosques .
umayyad caliph al-walid i bought the church of st . john from the christians .
overall , abd al-malik ibn marwanbled al-waleed 's fathercifully transformed 10 churches in damascus into mosques .
the process of turning churches into mosques was intensive in the villages where most of the people converted to islam .
mosques have been established in many places , especially in judaism .
mosques have also been converted for use by other religions , notably in southern spain , after the conquest of the moors in 1492 .
the most famous of the buildings in the city are the great mosque of cordoba .
in large groups , a large mosque will normally hold them for their people .
some mosques will even rent convention centers or other large public buildings to hold the large number of muslims who attend .
mosques , especially those in countries where muslims are the majority , will also host eid prayers outside in courtyards , town squares or on the outskirts of town in an eidgah .
food is provided , at least in part , by members of the community , thereby creating nightly potluck dinners .
because of the community contribution necessary to serve " iftar " dinners , mosques with smaller communities may not be able to hold the " iftar " dinners daily .
some mosques will also hold meals before dawn .
as with iftar dinners , they usually provide the food for suhoor , although able mosques may provide food instead .
mosques will often invite poorer members of the community to share in beginning and breaking the fasts .
during each night of prayers , which can last for up to two hours each night , usually one member of the community who has memorized the entire qur ' an will recite a segment of the book .
sometimes several such peoplenight not necessarily of the local community performs turns to do this .
mosques or community usually provide meals during the night during the last ten days of ramadan .
muslims performing itikaf are required to stay within the mosque for ten consecutive days , often in worship or learning about islam .
as a result , the rest of the muslim community is responsible for providing the participants with food , drinks , and whatever else they need during their stay .
since mosques form the center of muslim communities , they are where muslims go to both give zakat and , if necessary , collect it .
before the holiday of eid ul-fitr , mosques also collect a special " zakat " that is supposed to help poor muslims attend the prayers and celebrations associated with the holiday .
the frequency by which muslims attend mosque services varies greatly around the world .
in the united states in particular , it has been shown in a study done by the institute for social policy and understanding that muslim americans who regularly attend mosques are more likely to work with their neighbors to solve community problems .
overall , “ there is no correlation between muslim attitudes toward violence and their frequency of mosque attendance . ”
when it comes to mosque attendance , there are reports that american muslim women and american muslim men attend the mosque .
also , when compared to the general public looking at religious services , young muslim americans attend the mosque at closer rates to older muslim americans .
the late 20th century saw more people in the number of mosques used for political purposes .
some governments in the muslim world have tried to limit the content of friday sermons to strictly religious topics .
common themes include social inequalities , necessity of jihad in the face of injustice , the universal struggle between good and evil , with the west often symbolizing moral and spiritual decadence , and criticism of local rulers for corruption and inefficiency .
countries with a minority muslim population are more likely than muslim-majority countries of the greater middle east to use mosques as a way to promote civic participation .
regular mosque attendants are more likely to participate in protests , sign petitions , and otherwise be involved in politics .
like other places of worship , mosques can be at the center of social conflicts .
the controversy surrounded the mosque was directly linked to rioting in bombay prefecture .
following the al-askari mosque bombing in iraq , imams and other islamic leaders used mosques and friday prayers to call for calm and peace in the midst of widespread violence .
a study 2005 suggests that while support for suicide bombings is not correlated with personal devotion to islam among palestinian muslims , it is correlated with mosque attendance because " participating in communal religious rituals of any kind likely encourages support for self-sacrificing behaviors that are done for the collective good " .
furthermore , the jewish defense league was suspected to plan to bomb the king fahd mosque in culver city , california .
outside the western world , in june 2001 , the hassan bek mosque was the target of attacks by hundreds of israelis after a suicide bomber killed 19 people in a night club in tel aviv .
although mosquegoing is highly encouraged for men , it is permitted to stay at home when one feels at risk from islamophobic persecution .
saudi involvement in sunni mosques around the world goes back to the 1960s .
saudi citizens have also contributed significantly to mosques in the islamic world , especially in countries where they see muslims as poor and oppressed .
the king fahd mosque in culver city , california and the islamic cultural center of italy in rome are two of saudi arabia 's largest investments in foreign mosques .
in the western world , and in the united states , anti-muslim sentiment and targeted domestic policy has created challenges for mosques and those looking to build them .
the mosque was later renamed the weizhou grand mosque in 2018 .
officials in the town said that the mosque had not been given proper building permits .
the residents of weizhou were worried about the mosque .
one of the most notable hypostyle mosques is the great mosque of cordoba in spain .
often , hypostyle mosques have outer arcades .
arab-plan mosques were built mostly under the umayyad and abbasid dynasties .
the persians had inherited a rich architectural legacy from the earlier persian dynasties .
during seljuq rule , as islamic mysticism was on the rise , the four-iwan arrangement took form .
the four-iwan format , finalized by the seljuqs , and later inherited by the safavids , firmly established the courtyard facade of such mosques , with the towering gateways at every side , as more important than the actual buildings themselves .
they usually took the form of a square-shaped central courtyard with large entrances at each side , giving the impression of gateways to the spiritual world .
there is also a large central dome , and a common feature is smaller domes that exist off-center over the prayer hall or throughout the rest of the mosque , where prayer is not performed .
this style was heavily influenced by byzantine architecture with its use of central domes .
the faisal mosque in islamabad , pakistan , in a relatively unusual design fuses contemporary lines with the more traditional look of an arab bedouin 's tent , with its large triangular prayer hall and four minarets .
the ones found in europe and north america appear to have various styles but most are built on western architectural designs .
in africa , most mosques are old but the new ones are built in imitation of those of the middle east .
a common feature in mosques is the minaret , the tall , slender tower that usually is at one of the corners of the mosque .
the first mosques had no minarets .
the first minaret was constructed in basra in 665 .
the oldest standing minaret in the world is the minaret of the great mosque of kairouan in tunisia .
in many countries like singapore where muslims are not the majority , mosques are prohibited from loudly broadcasting the " adhan " requesting prayer .
nearly every mosque gives a " muezzin " for each prayer to say the " adhan " as it is a recommended practice or " sunnah " of the islamic prophet muhammad .
at mosques that do not have minarets , the " adhan " is called instead from inside the mosque or somewhere else on the ground .
the " iqamah " , which is similar to the " adhan " and " proclaimed right before the commencement of prayers , is usually not proclaimed from the minaret even if a mosque has one .
the domes are often placed directly above the main prayer hall .
later , domes grew , from occupying a small part of the roof near the mihrab .
domes normally have a shape of a hemisphere .
some mosques have several domes , and a main dome .
some mosques have islamic calligraphy and quranic verses on the walls to help worshippers in focusing on the beauty of islam and its holiest book , the quran , as well as for decoration .
once designated , there are a limitations on the use of this formally designated masjid , and it may not be used for any purpose other than worship .
in many mosques , especially the early congregational mosques , the prayer hall is in the hypostyle form archdiocese held up by many columns .
the qiblah wall should be in a properly shaped mosque .
they arrange themselves so they face mecca .
in the qiblah wall , usually at its center , is the mihrab , a niche or depression indicating the direction of mecca .
thus , foyers with shelves to put shoes and racks to hold coats are commonplace among mosques .
as mosques are supposed to appeal to the community , they may also have additional facilities , from health clinics to libraries to gymnasiums , to serve the community .
there are many other rules that are different from mosque to mosque .
the permanent prayer leaderhesis imam ( must be a free and honest man .
in private mosques , the imam is appointed by the ruler .
according to the hanafi and maliki school of islamic jurisprudence , appointment of a prayer leader for friday service is mandatory because otherwise the prayer is invalid .
the shafi ' i and hanbali schools , however , argue that the appointment is not necessary and the prayer is valid as long as it is performed in a congregation .
a slave may lead a friday prayer .
all mosques have rules about cleanliness .
even to those who enter the prayer hall of a mosque without the intention of praying , there are still rules that apply .
shoes must not be worn in the carpeted area .
some mosques will also extend that rule to include other parts of the facility .
it is also not to come to the mosque after eating something that smells like garlic .
men are supposed to come to the mosque wearing loose and clean clothes that do not reveal the shape of the body .
likewise , it is recommended that women at a mosque wear loose clothing that covers to the wrists and ankles , and cover their heads with a " hijab " , or other covering .
many muslims wear middle eastern clothing associated with arabic islam to special occasions and prayers at mosques .
loud talking in the mosque , as well as discussion of topics deemed disrespectful , is forbidden in areas where people are praying .
the walls within the mosque have few items , except for islamic calligraphy , so muslims in prayer are not distracted .
women are usually told to hold the rows behind the men .
in part , this was a practical matter as the traditional posture for prayerkneeling on the floor , head to the groundmade mixed-gender prayer revealing for many women and distracting for some men .
traditionalists try to argue that muhammad preferred women to pray at home rather than at a mosque .
the second caliph ' umar at one time prohibited women from attending mosques especially at night .
sometimes a special part of the mosque was railed off for women .
in nearly two-thirds of american mosques , women pray behind partitions or in separate areas , not in the main prayer hall .
they say that non-muslims may not be allowed into mosques .
the quran speaks about the subject of non-muslims , and particularly polytheists , in mosques in two verses in its ninth chapter , sura at-tawba .
however , the umayyad caliph umar ii later forbade non-muslims from entering mosques , and his ruling remains in practice in present-day saudi arabia .
today , the decision on whether non-muslims should be allowed to enter mosques varies .
many mosques in the united states welcome non-muslims as a sign of openness to the rest of the community .
for mosques in other areas , it has most commonly been taken that non-muslims may only enter mosques if granted permission to do so by muslims , and if they have a legitimate reason .
visiting a mosque is allowed only between prayers .
in some moroccan cities , jews were required to remove their shoes when passing by a mosque .
the association of the mosque with education remained one of its main characteristics throughout history .
from the earliest days of islam , the mosque was the center of the muslim community , a place for prayer , meditation , religious instruction , political discussion , and a school .
