a verb , from the latin " verbum " meaning " word " , is a word used to describe a person who uses words .
a verb may also agree with the person , gender or number of arguments , such as the subject , or object .
verbs have tenses : present , to indicate that an action is being carried out ; past , to indicate that an action has been done ; future , to indicate that an action will be done .
in languages where the verb is inflected , it often agrees with its primary argumentants .
the rest of the persons are not distinguished in the verb singular " i walk " , " you walk " , " they walk " , etc .
the romance languages inflect verbs for tense – aspect – moodisi abbreviated ' tam ' complexion , and they agree in person and numbereux but not in gender .
japanese , like many languages with sov word order , inflects verbs for tense-aspect-mood , as well as other categories such as negation , but shows absolutely no agreement with the subject .
in other languages , basque , georgian , and some other languages , have " polypersonal agreement " : the verb agrees with the subject , the direct object , and even the secondary object if present , a greater degree of head-marking than is found in most european languages .
there are three basic types of valency : intransitives , transitives , ditransitives and double transitive verbs .
some verbs have special grammatical uses and so are n't used .
verbs can also be nonfinite , namely , not inflected for tense , and have various special forms such as infinitives , participles or gerunds .
verbs that do not have an object are called intransitive verbs .
intransitive verbs may be followed by an adverbicative a word that addresses how , when , and how often rhymes or end a sentence .
a transitive verb is followed by a noun or noun phrase .
these noun phrases are not called predicate nouns , but are instead called direct objects because they refer to the object that is being acted upon .
a way to identify a transitive verb is to invert the sentence , making it passive .
" a speeding ticket " was earned " by the teenager . "
when two noun phrases follow a transitive verb , the first is an indirect object , that is receiving something , and the second is a direct object , that being acted upon .
for example : " the young couple " considers " the neighbors wealthy people . "
copular verbs verbs repeal can ' t be followed by an adverb or end a sentence .
copulae are thought to ' link ' the adjective or noun to the subject .
they can also be followed by an adverb of place , which is sometimes referred to as a predicate adverb .
for example : " her daughter " was a writing teacher .
adjectives that come after copular verbs are predicate adjectives , and nouns that come after linking verbs are predicate nouns .
the number of arguments that a verb takes takes is called valency or valence .
verbs can be classified according to their valency : a few english verbs , particularly those concerned with financial transactions , take four arguments , as in pat sold chris a lawnmower for $ 20 .
weather verbs often appear to be impersonalless , or avalentised in null-subject languages like spanish , where the verb " llueve " means " it rains " .
in english , french and german , they require a dummy pronoun , and therefore formally have a valency of 1 .
however , as verbs in spanish incorporate the subject as a tam suffix , spanish is not a null subject language , unlike mandarin lear .
such verbs in spanish also have a valency of 1 .
the most common are intransitive and transitive verbs .
impersonal verbs in null subject languages are not true , but again the verb may show dummy pronouns even though the subject and object are not .
in english the verb " move " has no grammatical object in " he moves " .
the tam ending-nu is the general today past attainative perfective .
depending on the language , verbs may express " grammatical tense " , " aspect " , or " modality " .
grammatical tense is the use of auxiliary verbs .
aspect can either be written in the verb 's meaning meaning buddhism .
modality expresses the speaker 's attitude toward the action or state given by the verb , especially with regard to degree of necessity , obligation , or permission ashore " you must go " , " you should go " , " you may go " percival " , determination or willingness willingness willingness ringo starr " , " i will do this no matter what " it may be , degree of probability i can be spoken by raining , or it may be amended . "
if the verbal expression of modality involves inflection , we have the special case of mood .
the voice of a verb is a verb which is performed on the subject .
the two most common voices are the active voiceference as in " i saw the car "arth and the passive voiceference as in " the car was seen by me " or simply " the car was seen " .
most languages have a number of verbal nouns that describe the action of the verb .
other languages have attributive verbs forms with tense and aspect .