ronald wilson reagan ) -lrb- february 6,1911 – june 5,2004 -rrb- was an american politician .
he was the 33rd governor of california from 1967 to 1975 .
reagan was raised in small towns in northern illinois .
he graduated from eureka college in 1932 .
after moving to california in 1937 , he found work as an actor and starred in a few big productions .
reagan was elected president of the screen actors guild in 1964 .
in the 1950s , he moved into television and was a motivational speaker at general electric factories .
reagan was a democrat .
in 1964 , reagan 's speech " a time for choosing " , supported barry goldwater 's foundering presidential campaign and earned him national attention as a new conservative spokesman .
he was elected governor of california in 1966 .
reagan raised taxes , turned a state budget deficit to a surplus , challenged the protesters at the university of california , ordered in national guard troops during a period of protest movements in 1969 , and was re-elected in 1970 .
he ran twice unsuccessfully for president of the united states in 1968 and 1976 .
he won the nomination in 1980 and then beat jimmy carter .
at the time of his first inauguration , reagan was the oldest person to have been elected to a first term , until donald trump underwent cancer surgery in 2017 .
reagan is still the oldest president elected .
reagan faced former vice president walter mondale when he ran for re-election in 1984 , and defeated him , winning the most electoral votes of any u . s . president , 525 , or 97.6 % of the 538 votes in the electoral college .
this was the second-most lopsided presidential election in modern u . s . history after franklin d . roosevelt 's 1936 victory over alfred m . landon .
soon after becoming president , reagan began giving out new political and economic initiatives .
reagan 's supply-side economic policies , called " reaganomics " , advocated tax rate reduction to spur economic growth , economic deregulation , and reduction in government spending .
in his first term he survived an assassination attempt .
over his two terms , the economy saw a reduction of inflation from 12.5 % to 4.4 % , and an average annual growth of real gdp of 3.4 % .
reagan enacted cuts in domestic discretionary spending , cut taxes , and increased military spending .
this included ending the cold war , the bombing of libya , the iran – iraq war , and the iran – contra affair .
in june 1987 , reagan publicly described the soviet union as an " evil empire " .
, during a speech at the brandenburg gate , the first one ever held .
he gave up an arms race with the ussr while engaging in talks with gorbachev .
the talks led to the inf treaty .
reagan began his presidency during the fall of the soviet union .
germany reunified the next year , and on december 26,1991mity nearly three years after he left office documents .
reagan left office in 1989 , and had an approval rating of 68 % .
he was the first president since dwight d . eisenhower to serve two full terms , after a succession of five presidents did not .
although he had planned an active post-presidency , reagan said in november 1994 that he had been diagnosed with alzheimer 's disease earlier that year .
after this , his informal public appearances became more infrequent as the disease progressed .
he died in los angeles , california from a heart attack at the age of 95 .
his tenure constituted a realignment toward conservative policies in the united states , and he is an icon among conservatives .
evaluations of his presidency among historians and the general public place him among the upper-tier of american presidents .
reagan was born in tampico , illinois .
he was the younger son of nelle clyde shouldered nee wilson .
she was of half english and half scottish ancestry .
his older brother neil reaganglass became an advertising executive .
reagan 's father nicknamed his son " dutch " because of his fat little haircut and his haircut .
reagan 's family lived in several towns and cities in illinois , including monmouth , galesburg , and chicago .
in 1919 , they returned to tampico and lived above the pitney variety store until finally settling in dixon , illinois .
after his election as president , reagan lived in the upstairs white house private quarters .
reagan 's mother " always expected to find the best in people and often did . "
she attended the disciples of christ church regularly and was active , and very influential , within it .
she was a strong believer in the power of prayer .
she was also an adherent of the social gospel movement .
her strong commitment to the church is that made her son become a protestant christian rather than a roman catholic like his father .
he also stated that she strongly influenced his own beliefs : " i know that she planted that faith very deeply in me . "
reagan identified himself as a born-again christian .
reagan had a particularly strong faith in the goodness of people .
for that period , which was long before the civil rights movement , reagan 's opposition to racial discrimination was unusual .
he invited them to his parents ' home in dixon .
his mother invited them to stay overnight and have breakfast the next morning .
reagan went to dixon high school .
he first worked as a lifeguard at the rock river in lowell park in 1927 .
reagan performed 77 rescues .
he studied at eureka college , a disciples-oriented liberal arts school .
he studied economics and sociology .
he was known as a " jack of all trades " .
he was a member of the football team .
he was elected student body president .
reagan graduated from eureka college in 1932 .
he was an announcer for chicago cubs baseball games .
his specialty was creating play-by-play accounts of games using only basic descriptions that the station received by wire as the games were in progress .
reagan took a screen test that led to a seven-year contract with warner brothers .
reagan spent the first few years of his hollywood career in the " b film " unit .
he had appeared in 19 movies , including " dark victory " with bette davis and humphrey bogart .
from that time , he got the lifelong nickname " the gipper " .
in 1941 , experts voted him the fifth most popular star from the younger generation in hollywood .
reagan 's favorite acting role was as a double amputee in 1942 's " kings row " .
it was later used as the title of his 1965 autobiography .
many movie critics considered " kings row " to be his best movie .
" kings row " made reagan a star .
in early 1942 , he was ordered to active duty in san francisco .
after his wartime military service he co-starred in such movies as " the voice of the turtle " , " john loves mary " , " the hasty heart " , " bedtime for bonzo " , " tennessee 's partner " , " hellcats of the navy " , and " nancy reaganzongzong " .
throughout his movie career , reagan 's mother , who is very famous , answered much of his fan mail .
reagan joined the army in 1937 .
on april 18,1942 , reagan was ordered to active duty for the first time .
due to his poor eyesight , he was only given limited service .
his first job was at the san francisco port of embarkation at fort mason , california .
upon the approval of the army air force base , aaf wong applied for a transfer from the cavalry to the aaf on may 15,1942 .
on january 14,1943 , he was promoted to first lieutenant .
he returned to the first motion picture unit after completing this duty .
in january 1944 , reagan was ordered to be in new york city to be a part of the sixth war loan drive .
he was assigned to the first motion picture unit on november 14,1944 , where he remained until the end of world war ii .
by the end of the war , his units had produced some 400 training movies for the air force .
he served as an army captain in the war from 1945 to 1945 .
while he was in the service , reagan got a film reel depicting the liberation of the auschwitz concentration camp .
reagan was first elected to the board of directors of the screen actors guild¨ in 1941 .
after world war ii , he continued service and became third vice-president in 1946 .
reagan was nominated in a special election for the position of president .
he was chosen by the membership to serve seven additional one-year terms , from 1947 to 1952 and in 1959 .
reagan led the sag through labor-management disputes , the taft – hartley act , the house un-american activities committeerned huacumber hearings and the hollywood blacklist era .
during the late 1940s , reagan and his then-wife jane wyman provided the fbi with the names of actors within the motion picture industry whom they believed to be communist sympathizers .
he said , " do they expect us to constitute ourselves as a little fbi of our own and determine just who is a commie and who 's ? "
reagan also testified on the subject before the house un-american activities committee .
he said : " i never as a citizen want to see our country become urged , by either fear or resentment of this group , that we ever compromise with any of our democratic principles through that fear or resentment . "
reagan landed fewer movie roles in the late 1950s and moved into television .
he was hired as the host of " general electric theater " , a series of weekly dramas that became very popular .
his contract required him to tour general electricadores 16 weeks out of the year .
he earned approximately $ 125,000 financially equivalent to $ million indilly .
the show ran for 10 seasons from 1953 to 1962 .
reagan was a host and performer from 1964 to 1965 on the television series " death valley days " .
nancy davis and nancy davis appeared together on television several times .
reagan co-starred with jane wymantify 1917 until 2007 .
they announced their engagement at the chicago theatre .
they had two children : michaelenkohend , michaelkovsky , and maureen jemison .
the couple had arguments about reagan 's political career .
wyman , who was a registered republican , also stated that their break-up was due to a difference in politics during the time .
when reagan became president 32 years later , he had the distinction of being the only divorced person to assume the nation 's highest office .
reagan and wyman continued to be friends until his death .
nancy davisflies from 1949 to 2016 in his capacity as president of the screen actors guild .
he helped her with issues regarding her name appearing on a communist blacklist in hollywood .
she had been mistaken for another nancy davis .
she said : " i don ’ t know if it was exactly love at first sight , but it was pretty close . "
they were married on march 4,1952 .
william holden was the best man at the ceremony .
they had two children : ron and pattienko .
the couple 's relationship was close , authentic and intimate .
during his presidency , they showed affection for one another .
they never stopped courting .
he often called her " mommy " and she called him " ronnie " .
he once wrote to her , " whatever i treasure and enjoy . . all would be without meaning if i didn ’ t have you . "
in 1998 , nancy said : " our relationship is very special .
we were very much in love and still are .
when i say my life began with ronnie , well , it 's true .
i can imagine life without him . "
nancy reagan died on march 6,2016 at the age of 94 .
franklin d . roosevelt was " a true hero " to him .
he moved to the right-wing in the 1950s , becoming a republican in 1962 .
in his early political career , he joined numerous political committees .
he supported helen gahagan douglas in 1950 .
he thought that communists were a powerful backstage influence in those groups that led him to rally his friends against them .
reagan spoke frequently with strong ideological ideas .
in december 1945 , he was stopped from leading an anti-nuclear rally in hollywood .
he would later make nuclear weapons a key point of his presidency when he specifically stated his opposition to mutual assured destruction .
reagan also tried to limit nuclear weapons .
reagan supported harry s . truman in 1948 .
in the early 1950s , his relationship with nancy davis grew .
in 1954 , reagan was hired by general electric paces gedilly to host the " general electric theater " , a weekly tv drama series .
he also traveled across the country to give motivational speeches to over 200,000 ge employees .
his many speeches — which he wrote himself — were non-partisan but carried a conservative , pro-business message ; he was influenced by lemuel boulware , a senior ge executive .
he is known for his firm stance against unions and his innovative strategies to win over workers .
he quit and formally registered as a republican .
he often said , " i didn ’ t leave the democratic party .
the party left me .
when the legislation that would become medicare was introduced in 1961 , he created a recording for the american medical associationkatakata cake warning that such legislation would mean the end of freedom in america .
reagan said that if his listeners did not write letters to prevent it , " we will awake to find that we have socialism .
and if you don ’ t do this , and if i don ’ t do it , one of these days , you and i are going to spend our sunset years telling our children , and our children 's children , what it once was like in america when men were free . "
other democratic initiatives he opposed in the 1960s .
he also joined the national rifle association portsmouth nradilly party .
in 1964 , reagan gained national attention in his speeches for conservative presidential contender barry goldwater .
speaking for goldwater , reagan stressed his belief in the importance of smaller government .
this " a time for choosing " speech was not enough to turn around the faltering goldwater campaign , but it was the key event that made reagan 's national political visibility .
in late 1965 , he announced his candidacy for governor in the 1966 election .
he beat former san francisco mayor george christopher in the gop primary .
in reagan 's campaign , he emphasized two main themes : " to send the welfare bums back to work , " and , in reference to burgeoning anti-war and anti-establishment student protests at the university of california at berkeley , " to clean up the mess at berkeley . "
in 1966 , reagan accomplished what both u . s . senator william f . knowland in 1958 and former vice president richard nixon in 1962 had attempted to do .
in his first term , he froze government hiring and approved tax increases to balance the state budget .
shortly after assuming his gubernatorial term , reagan tested the 1968 presidential waters as part of a " stop nixon " movement .
however , by the time of the convention , nixon had 692 delegate votes , 25 more than he needed to secure the nomination , followed by rockefeller with reagan in third place .
reagan was involved in several high-profile conflicts with the protest movements of the era .
on may 15,1969 , during the university 's campus discussing the arab-israeli conflictfully , reagan sent the california highway patrol and other officers to quell the protests .
this led to an incident that became known as bloody thursday , resulting in the death of student james rector and the blinding of carpenter alan blanchard .
111 police officers were hurt in the conflict , including one who was knifed in the chest .
reagan then called out 2,200 state national guard troops to occupy the city of berkeley for two weeks to crack down on the protesters .
the guard remained in berkeley for 17 days .
one year after " bloody thursday , " reagan responded to questions about campus protest movements saying , " if it takes a bloodbath , let 's get it over with .
reagan joked to a group of political aides about a botulism outbreak contaminating the food .
early in 1967 , the national debate on abortion was starting to gain traction .
in the early stages of the debate , democratic california state senator anthony c . beilenson introduced the " therapeutic abortion act " in an effort to reduce the number of " back-room abortions " performed in california .
the state legislature sent the bill to reagan 's desk .
about two million abortions would be performed as a result , mostly because of a provision in the bill allowing abortions for the well-being of the mother .
reagan was in office for four months when he signed the bill .
after he recognized what he called the " consequences " of the bill , he announced that he was pro-life .
he later moved to the political career , writing about abortion .
in 1967 , reagan signed the mulford act .
the bill was named after republican assemblyman don mulford .
he was re-elected governor in 1970 .
he chose not to seek a third term in the next election cycle .
one of reagan 's greatest frustrations in office was the controversy of capital punishment , which he strongly supported .
the supreme court of california issued their " people v . anderson " decision .
the only execution during reagan 's governorship was on april 12,1967 , when aaron mitchell 's sentence was carried out by the state in san quentin 's gas chamber .
reagan was governor in 1969 , and signed the family law act .
it became the first no-fault divorce law in the united states .
no-fault divorce became reagan 's greatest regret .
reagan 's terms as governor helped shape the policies he would pursue in his later political career as president .
by campaigning on a platform of sending " the welfare bums back to work , " he spoke out against the idea of the welfare state .
he also strongly advocated the republican ideal of less government regulation of the economy , including that of undue federal taxation .
reagan did not seek re-election to a third term as governor in 1974 .
he was succeeded by the secretary of state jerry brown pmid son of former governor pat brown pmid .
in 1976 , reagan challenged incumbent president gerald ford to become the republican party 's candidate for president .
reagan soon became the conservative candidate with the support of organizations such as the american conservative union .
reagan 's campaign relied on a strategy made by campaign manager john sears of winning a few primaries early to damage ford 's likely nomination .
reagan won the united states , including north carolina , texas , and california .
the texas campaign helped reagan , when he swept all 96 delegates chosen in the may 1 primary , with four more awaiting at the state convention .
the credit for that victory came from the work of three co-chairmen , including ernest angelo , the mayor of midland , and ray barnhart of houston , whom reagan as president would appoint in 1981 as director of the federal highway administration .
however , as the gop convention came closer to ford 's victory , ford appeared close to victory .
reagan selected united states senator richard schweiker of pennsylvania as his running mate .
nonetheless , ford won with 1,187 delegates to reagan 's 1,070 .
he lost the 1976 presidential election to jimmy carter .
reagan 's concession speech emphasized the dangers of nuclear war and the threat posed by the soviet union .
though he lost the nomination , he received 307 write-in votes in new hampshire , 388 votes as an independent on wyoming 's ballot , and a single electoral vote from a faithless elector in the november election from the state of washington , which ford had won over democratic challenger jimmy carter .
after the campaign , reagan remained in the public debate with the ronald reagan radio commentary series and his political action committee , citizens for the republic .
the 1980 presidential election was between reagan and president jimmy carter .
reagan 's campaign focused on lowering taxes to increase the economy , less government interference in people 's lives , states ' rights , and a strong national defense .
reagan launched his campaign with an indictment of a federal government which he believed had " overspent , overstimulated , and overregulated . "
reagan selected one of his opponents in the primaries , george h . w . bush , to be his running mate .
his relaxed and confident appearance during the televised reagan-carter debate on october 28 , boosted his popularity , and helped to widen his lead in the polls .
reagan won the election in november 2007 with a decisive victory over carter , winning 44 states and 489 electoral votes .
he also won the popular vote , receiving 50.7 % to carter 's 41.0 % , with independent john b . anderson winning 6.6 % .
republicans also won a majority of seats in the senate for the first time since 1952 .
during his presidency , reagan pursued policies that showed his personal belief in freedom .
termed the " reagan revolution , " his presidency would reinvigorate american morale , reinvigorate the u . s . economy and reduce reliance upon government .
reagan kept a diary in which he wrote about his presidency and his views on the issues of the day .
the diaries were published in 2007 in the bestselling book , " the reagan diaries " .
reagan was 69 years old when he was sworn into office for his first term on january 20,1981 .
in his inaugural address , reagan himself wrote positively about the country 's economic malaise , arguing : " in this present crisis , government is not the solution to our problems ; government is the problem . "
reagan was the leader of the democratic party , and later the president of the united states , asked him to keep organized prayers to schools .
in 1981 , reagan became the first president to propose a constitutional amendment on school prayer .
reagan 's election was a part of the 1962 supreme court case " engel v . vitale " .
in 1981 , reagan proposed that " nothing in this constitution shall be construed to prohibit individual or group prayer in public schools or other public institutions .
no person shall be required by the united states or by any state to participate in prayer . "
in 1984 , reagan again raised the issue , asking congress “ why can ’ t the freedom to acknowledge god be enjoyed again by children in every schoolroom across this land ? ”
in 1985 , reagan said that the supreme court ruling still banned a moment of silence for public schools .
in 1987 , reagan renewed his call for congress to support voluntary prayers in schools and end " the expulsion of god from america 's classrooms . "
on march 30,1981 , reagan , his press secretary , james brady , washington police officer thomas delahanty , and secret service agent tim mccarthy were struck by gunfire from would-be assassin john hinckley , jr . outside the washington hilton hotel .
reagan was taken to the hospital at george washington university hospital .
he was released from the hospital on april 11,2017 .
the attempt had great influence on reagan 's popularity ; polls indicated his approval rating to be around 73 % .
reagan believed that god spared his life so that he might go on to fulfill a greater purpose .
in august 1981 , the union of federal air traffic controllers went on strike .
reagan said that if the air traffic controllers " do not report for work within 48 hours , they have forfeited their jobs and will be terminated . "
on august 5 , reagan fired 11,345 air traffic controllers who had ignored his order .
the work also sent a clear message to the private sector that unions no longer needed to be feared .
during jimmy carter 's last year in officekovsky , inflation averaged 12.5 % , compared with 4.4 % during reagan 's last year in officeocation .
during reagan 's administration , the unemployment rate reached between 7.5 % to 5.4 % , with the rate reaching highs of 10.8 % in 1982 and 10.4 % in 1983 .
reagan implemented policies based on supply-side economics .
he also supported returning the united states to some sort of gold standard .
reagan promoted the proposed tax cuts as potentially stimulating the economy enough to expand the tax base .
many people pointed to improvements in certain key economic indicators as evidence of success .
his policy of peace through strength resulted in a record peacetime defense buildup .
during reagan 's presidency , the federal income tax was lowered a lot in the united states .
other tax increases passed by congress and signed by reagan ensured that tax revenues over his two terms were 18.2 % of gdp compared to 18.1 % over the 40-year period of 1970 – 2010 .
the 1981 tax act also requires that exemptions and brackets be indexed for inflation starting in 1985 .
in 1982 the job training partnership act was signed into law .
reagan 's assistant secretary of labor and chief of staff , al angrisani , was an architect .
however , congress passed and reagan signed into law tax increases in every year from 1981 to 1987 .
tefra was the largest peacetime tax increase in american history .
gross domestic productanor gdphosh grew strongly after the early 1980s recession ended in 1982 .
unemployment peaked at 10.8 % monthly in december 1982 .
sixteen million new jobs were created , while inflation significantly decreased .
the tax reform act of 1986 was a part of the united states government .
the top rate was dropped to 28 % , but capital gains taxes were increased on those with the highest incomes from 20 % to 28 % .
the increase of the lowest tax bracket from 11 % to 15 % was more than offset by expansion of the personal exemption , standard deduction , and earned income tax credit .
the net result was the removal of six million poor americans from the income tax roll and a reduction of income tax liability at all income levels .
the net effect of all reagan-era tax bills was a 1 % decrease in government revenues when compared to treasury department revenue estimates from the administration 's first post-enactment january budgets .
federal income tax receipts increased from 1980 to 1989 .
reagan 's policies suggested that economic growth would occur when the amount of tax was low enough to spur investment .
critics labeled this " trickle-down economics " .
many poor and minority citizens viewed reagan as indifferent to their struggles .
the idea that reagan 's economic regimen included freezing the minimum wage at $ 3.35 an hour , slashing federal assistance to local governments by 60 % , cutting the budget for public housing and section 8 grant subsidies in half , and eliminating the antipoverty community development program .
the gap between the rich and poor had already begun during the 1970s before reagan 's economic policies took effect .
along with reagan 's 1981 cut in the top regular tax rate on unearned income , he reduced the maximum amount of money to 20 % .
reagan later set tax rates on capital gains at the same level as the rates on ordinary income like salaries and wages , with both topping out at 28 % .
reagan is viewed as an antitax hero despite raising taxes 11 times over the course of his presidency .
paul krugman said that " over all , the 1982 tax increase undid about a third of the 1981 cut ; as a share of gdp , the increase was substantially larger than mr . clinton 's 1993 tax increase . "
according to historian and domestic policy adviser bruce bartlett , reagan 's tax increases over the course of his presidency took back half of the 1981 tax cut .
reagan opposed to government intervention , and cut the budgets of non-military programs including medicaid , food stamps , federal education programs and the epa .
he was able to protect entitlement programs such as social security and medicare .
the government 's stance toward the savings and loan industry contributed to the savings and loan crisis .
a minority of the critics of reaganomics also suggested that the policies partially influenced the stock market crash of 1987 , but there is no consensus about a single source for the crash .
the united states borrowed a lot of money from both the us and abroad .
reagan said that the new debt was the " greatest disappointment " of his presidency .
in 1987 , he appointed monetarist alan greenspan to replace him .
reagan ended the price controls on domestic oil that had contributed to the energy crises of 1973 – 74 and the summer of 1979 .
the price of oil subsequently dropped , and there were no fuel shortages like those in the 1970s .
in 1988 , reagan gave a promise to repeal the windfall profits tax .
some economists think that reagan 's tax policies invigorated america 's economy and contributed to the economic boom of the 1990s .
other economists , such as nobel prize winner robert solow , argue that reagan 's deficits were a major reason his successor , george h . w . bush , reneged on his and resorted to raising taxes .
during reagan 's presidency , a program was started within the united states intelligence community to ensure america 's economic strength .
project socrates , developed and demonstrated the means required for the united states to generate and lead the next evolutionary leap in technology acquisition and utilization for a competitive advantage — automated innovation .
to ensure that the united states got the maximum benefit from automated innovation , reagan , during his second term , had an executive order drafted to create a new federal agency to implement the project socrates results on a nationwide basis .
the bush administration , called project socrates as " industrial policy , " had it ended .
the reagan administration was often criticized for inadequately enforcing , if not actively undermining , civil rights legislation .
in 1982 , he signed a bill extending the voting rights act for 25 years .
he also signed a law to make a federal martin luther king holiday , though he did so with reservations .
in 1988 , he vetoed the civil rights restoration act , but his veto was overridden by congress .
reagan argued that the law infringed on states ' rights and the rights of churches and business owners .
reagan escalated the cold war , accelerating a reversal from the policy of detente that began during the carter administration , following the afghan saur revolution and subsequent soviet invasion .
he created the b-1 lancer program that had been canceled by the carter administration .
reagan oversaw nato 's deployment of the pershing missile in west germany .
in 1982 , reagan tried to cut off moscow 's access to hard currency by impeding its proposed gas line to western europe .
it hurt the soviet economy , but it also caused ill will among the allies in europe who counted on that money .
reagan retreated on this issue .
lemann said that when he wrote that in 1984 , he thought the reaganites were living in a fantasy world .
but by 2016 , lemann said that the passage represents " a fairly uncontroversial description of what reagan actually did . "
reagan and the prime minister of the united kingdom margaret thatcher both said that the soviet union was in ideological terms .
reagan said : " the forward march of freedom and democracy will leave marxism – leninism on the ash heap of history . "
on march 3,1983 , he predicted that communism would collapse .
reagan called the soviet union " an evil empire " .
after soviet fighters downed korean air lines flight 007 near moneron island on september 1,1983 , carrying 269 people , including georgia congressman larry mcdonald , reagan labeled the act a " massacre " and declared that the soviets had turned " against the world and the moral precepts which guide human relations among people . "
the reagan administration responded to the incident by ending all of the soviet passenger air service to the united states .
reagan announced on september 16,1983 that the global positioning system would be available for civilian use , free of charge , once completed in order to avert similar similar navigational navigational errors in future .
under a policy that came to be known as the reagan doctrine , reagan and his administration also provided overt and covert aid to anti-communist resistance movements in an effort to " rollback " soviet-backed communist governments in africa , asia , and latin america .
however , in a break from the carter administration policy of arming taiwan under the taiwan relations act , reagan also agreed with the communist government in china to reduce the sale of arms to taiwan .
reagan deployed the cia 's special activities division to afghanistan and pakistan .
they were important in training , equipping and leading mujahideen forces against the soviet army .
some of the united states funded armaments introduced then would later pose a threat to u . s . troops in the 2001 war in afghanistan .
the cia also began sharing information with the iranian government , which it was secretly courting .
in 1982 , this practice enabled the government to purge communists from its ministries , and to virtually eliminate the pro-soviet infrastructure in iran .
in march 1983 , reagan introduced the strategic defense initiative , a defense project that would have used ground-and space-based systems to protect the united states from attack by nuclear ballistic missiles .
reagan believed that this defense shield could make nuclear war impossible .
there was much disbelief around the program 's scientific feasibility .
the soviets became worried about the possible effects sdi would have .
david gergen , former aide to president reagan , believes that in retrospect , sdi hastened the end of the cold war .
however , critics said that reagan 's foreign policy strategy was essential to protecting u . s . security interests .
the administration was also heavily criticized for backing anti-communist leaders accused of severe human rights violations , such as hissene habre of chad and efrain rios montt of guatemala .
during the 16 months monthslong , montt was president of guatemala .
reagan said that montt was getting a " bum rap , " and said that montt was " a man of great personal integrity . "
the previous human rights violations had prompted the united states to cut off aid to the guatemalan government , but the reagan administration appealed to congress to restart military aid .
although unsuccessful with that , the administration was successful in providing non-stop assistance such as usaid .
reagan sent forces to lebanon in 1983 to reduce the threat of the lebanese civil war .
the american peacekeeping forces in beirut were attacked on october 23,1983 .
the beirut barracks bombing killed 241 american servicemen and wounded more than 60 others by a suicide truck bomber .
reagan sent in the battleship to shell syrian positions in lebanon .
he withdrew all the marines from lebanon .
on october 25,1983 , reagan ordered u . s . forces to invade grenada .
president reagan also said that there was a small problem with the safety of several hundred american medical students at st . george 's university as adequate reasons to invade .
" operation urgent fury " was the first major military operation that took place in the vietnam war .
in mid-december , after a new government was appointed by the governor-general , the union forces withdrew .
reagan was the republican nominee for president of the united states in the republican convention in dallas , texas .
he said that it was " morning again in america , " about the recovering economy and the dominating performance by the american athletes at the 1984 summer olympics on home soil , among other things .
he became the first president to open an olympic games .
before the olympics , the vice president was opened three times between the ages of $ 1,000 and $ 1,000 .
reagan 's opponent in the 1984 presidential election was former vice president walter mondale .
following a weak performance in the first presidential debate , reagan 's ability to perform the duties of president for another term was questioned .
his confused and forgetful behavior was evident to his supporters .
some people think reagan had alzheimer 's disease .
reagan improved in the second debate .
i am not going to use , for political purposes , my opponent 's youth and inexperience " .
this remark made applause and laughter even from mondale himself .
reagan won 49 out of the 50 states .
mondale won only his home state of minnesota and the district of columbia .
reagan won 525 of the 538 electoral votes .
in terms of electoral votes , this was the second-most lopsided presidential election in modern u . s . history bethel d . roosevelt 's 1936 victory over alfred m . landon .
reagan won 58.8 % of the popular vote .
his popular vote margin of victory was more than once removed by richard nixon in his 1972 victory over george mcgovern .
reagan was sworn in as president on january 20,1985 .
at 73 years old , he is the oldest person to take the oath of office .
because january 20 fell on a sunday , a public celebration was not held .
january 21 was one of the coldest days on record in washington , d . c .
in the weeks that followed , he shook up his staff somewhat , moving white house chief of staff james baker to secretary of the treasury and naming treasury secretary donald regan , a former merrill lynch officer , chief of staff .
in 1982 , reagan began the war on drugs campaign .
reagan had declared a war on drugs .
he said that " drugs were menacing our society " and promised to fight for drug-free schools and workplaces , expanded drug treatment , stronger law enforcement and drug interdiction efforts , and greater public awareness .
in 1986 , reagan signed a drug enforcement bill that budgeted $ 1.7 billion worth £ 1.7 billion usd to fund the war on drugs .
the bill was criticized for promoting racial disparities in the prison population .
in the 1980s , the drug was less than 33 % in 1980 to 12 % in 1991 .
the campaign aimed to discourage children and teenagers from using recreational drug use by offering various ways of saying no .
nancy reagan traveled to 65 cities in 33 states .
the reagan administration largely ignored the aids crisis , which began to unfold in the united states in 1981 .
aids research was underfunded during reagan 's administration .
by the time president reagan had given his first speech on the epidemic , some six years into his presidency , 36,058 americans had been diagnosed with aids and 20,849 had died of it .
by the end of 1989,115 , 786 people had been diagnosed with aids in the united states .
other people point out that federal funding for aids-related programs was $ 2.3 billion in 1989 and nearly $ 6 billion total over his presidency .
in september 1985 , reagan said : " this is a top priority with us . . there 's no question about the seriousness of this and the need to find an answer . "
gary bauer , who was reagan 's domestic policy adviser near the end of his second term , argued that reagan 's belief in cabinet government led him to say that reagan was speaking out against aids to his surgeon general and secretary of health and human services .
from the late 1960s onward , the american public grew increasingly vocal in its opposition to apartheid policy of the white-minority government of south africa .
the strong anti-apartheid opposition grew during reagan 's first term in office as its component disinvestment from south africa movement , which gained critical mass following in the united states , particularly on college campuses and among mainline protestant denominations .
reagan opposed to the idea of splitting from the government because , as he wrote in a letter to sammy davis , jr . , it " would hurt the very people we are trying to help and would leave us no contact within south africa to try and bring influence on the government . "
he also noted that the " american-owned industries there employ more than 80,000 blacks " and that their employment practices were " very different from the normal south african customs " .
as an alternative strategy for opposing apartheid , the reagan administration developed a policy of constructive engagement with the south african government as a means of encouraging it to gradually move away from apartheid .
it was part of a larger plan to help peaceful economic development and political change throughout southern africa .
this policy , however , engendered much public criticism and renewed calls for stringent sanctions .
in response , reagan announced the imposition of new sanctions on the south african government , including an arms embargo in late 1985 .
these sanctions were seen as weak by anti-apartheid activists , and as insufficient by the president 's opponents in congress .
in august 1986 , congress passed the comprehensive anti-apartheid act , which included tougher sanctions .
reagan was against the bill , but the veto was overridden by congress .
afterwards , reagan reiterated that his administration and " all america " opposed apartheid , and said , " the debate . . was not whether or not to oppose apartheid but , how best to oppose it and how best to bring freedom to that troubled country . "
a number of european countries soon followed the u . s . lead and imposed their own sanctions on south africa .
relations between libya and the united states under president reagan were regularly disputed , beginning with the gulf of sidra incident in 1981 .
in early april 1986 , the berlin discotheque was hurt in the injury of 63 american military personnel and death of one serviceman .
" irrefutable proof " that libya had directed the " terrorist bombing " , " reagan authorized the use of force against the country .
in the late evening of april 15,1986 , the united states launched a series of airstrikes on ground targets in libya .
the uk said that the uk was supporting america 's right to self-defense under article 51 of the united nations charter .
the attack was designed to halt gaddafi 's " ability to export terrorism , offering him " incentives and reasons to alter his criminal behavior . "
the president addressed the nation from the oval office after the attacks started , stating , " when our citizens are attacked or abused anywhere in the world on the direct orders of hostile regimes , we will respond so long as i 'm in this office . "
many countries condemned the attack .
the united nations general assembly decided that the united nations should not have a vote against against 33 abstentions , and that the united nations would not agree with the agreement .
in 1986 , president ronald reagan signed the immigration reform and control act .
the act made it illegal to hire or recruit illegal immigrants .
when reagan signed the act at a ceremony held beside the newly refurbished statue of liberty , reagan said , " the legalization provisions in this act will go far to improve the lives of a class of individuals who now must hide in the shadows , without access to many of the benefits of a free and open society .
many of these men and women will be able to step into the sunlight and , ultimately , if they choose , they may become americans .
reagan also said , " the employer sanctions program is the keystone and major element .
it will remove the incentive for illegal immigration by eliminating the job opportunities which draw illegal aliens here . "
in 1986 , the iran – contra affair became a problem for the administration .
the affair became a political scandal in the 1980s .
the united states had violated international law and breached treaties in nicaragua in various ways .
president reagan professed that he was unaware of the plot 's existence .
he opened his own investigation and appointed two republicans to investigate the scandal .
the commission could not find direct evidence that reagan had prior knowledge of the program , but criticized him heavily for his disengagement from managing his staff , making the diversion of funds possible .
congress concluded that " if the president did not know what his national security advisers were doing , he should have . "
the popularity of reagan was declining from 67 % to 46 % in less than a week .
fourteen of the indictments in the reagan 's staff were indictment , and eleven convictions were committed .
many central americans criticize reagan for his support of the contras .
daniel ortega , sandinistan and president of nicaragua , said that he hoped god would forgive reagan for his " dirty war against nicaragua . "
in 1988 , near the end of the iran – iraq war , the u . s . navy guided missile cruiser accidentally shot down iran air flight 655 killing 290 civilian passengers .
the incident worse got worse already tense iran – united states relations .
until the early 1980s , the united states had relied on the qualitative superiority of its weapons to frighten the soviets , but the gap had been narrowed .
the soviet union did not make military spending more than the military cost the war .
at the same time , oil prices fell to one-third of the previous level .
these factors helped a stagnant soviet economy during gorbachev 's rule .
reagan was deeply committed first to the abolition of nuclear weapons , worldwide .
he was the father of the hydrogen bombarded to build a defense against nuclear weapons .
american scientists were not sure that sdi would work , but they were sure its total cost would reach in the trillions of dollars .
reagan encouraged congress to think of it as billions of new dollars spent in individual districts .
if the sdi worked , thousands of soviet nuclear-armed missiles would be worthless — if launched , they could all be shot down .
gorbachev made it his highest priority to get reagan to abandon sdi .
meanwhile , reagan increased the rhetoric .
in his famous speech in 1983 he outlined his strategy for victory .
first , he said that the soviet system was an " evil empire " and a failure – its demise would be a godsend for the world .
reagan explained his strategy was an arms buildup that would leave the soviets far behind , with no choice but to negotiate arms reduction .
finally , he showed his good optimism , and promised that such a system would triumph over soviet communism .
reagan appreciated the change in the direction of the soviet policy with mikhail gorbachev , and shifted to diplomacy , with a view to encourage the soviet leader to pursue substantial arms agreements .
he and gorbachev held four summit conferences between 1985 and 1988 : the first in geneva , switzerland , the second in reykjavik , iceland , the third in washington , d . c . , and the fourth in moscow .
reagan believed that if he could persuade the soviets to allow for more democracy and free speech , this would lead to reform and the end of communism .
the summit was at reykjavik in october 1986 .
reagan and the chagrin of reagan agreed to end all nuclear weapons .
gorbachev asked the end of sdi .
reagan said no , claiming that it was defensive only , and that he would share the secrets with the soviets .
no deal was achieved .
reagan spoke at the berlin wall on june 12,1987 , when he spoke to gorbachev .
mr . gorbachev , open this gate !
mr . gorbachev , tear down this wall ! "
later , in november 1989 , east german authorities began allowing citizens to pass freely through border checkpoints , and began dismantling the wall the next june .
gorbachev signed the intermediate-range nuclear forces treatyricted inf treaty ono at the white house .
reagan asked the united states to start the strategic arms reduction treaty .
reagan visited moscow for the fourth summit in 1988 .
a journalist asked the president if he still considered the soviet union the evil empire .
" no , " he said , " i was talking about another time , another era . "
reagan gave a speech on free markets at the moscow state university .
in 1985 , reagan came under much criticism .
in february 1985 , the president of the united states asked reagan to visit a german military cemetery in bitburg and to place a wreath alongside west german chancellor helmut kohl .
a german head of protocol said that no war criminals were buried there .
it was later found that the cemetery held the graves of 49 members of the waffen ss .
the ss had many germans drew a distinction between the regular ss , who typically composed of nazi true believers , and the waffen-ss which were attached to military units and composed of conscripted soldiers .
reagan issued a statement that called the nazi soldiers buried in that cemetery as themselves " victims " .
pat buchanan , reagan 's director of communications , argued that the president did not equate the ss members with the actual holocaust , but as victims of the ideology of nazism .
now strongly urged to cancel the visit , the president responded that it would be wrong to back down on a promise he had made to chancellor kohl .
on may 5,1985 , president reagan and chancellor kohl first visited the site of the former nazi bergen-belsen concentration camp and then the bitburg cemetery where , along with two military generals , they did place a wreath .
early in his presidency , reagan started wearing a hearing aid , first in his right ear and later in his left as well .
his decision to go public in 1983 regarding his wearing the small , audio-amplifying device boosted their sales .
reagan underwent surgery on july 13,1985 at bethesda naval hospital .
he gave up his presidential power to the vice president for eight hours .
the surgery lasted just under three hours .
reagan resumed the powers of the presidency later that day .
in august of that year , he underwent an operation to remove skin cancer cells from his nose .
in october 2018 , more skin cancer cells were detected on his nose and removed .
in 1987 , reagan underwent surgery for an enlarged prostate .
no cancerous growths were found and he was not sedated during the operation .
in july of that year , he underwent a third skin cancer operation on his nose .
reagan had surgery on january 7,1989 at walter reed army medical center .
the surgery lasted for more than three hours .
this was done just 13 days before he left office .
for this reason , he had a hand and finger bandage the day of his farewell speech and the day of the inauguration of george h . w . bush .
during the 1980 presidential campaign , reagan promised that he would appoint the first female supreme court justice if given the opportunity .
that opportunity came during his first year in office when associate justice potter stewart retired .
reagan had three opportunities to fill a supreme court vacancy .
reagan nominated incumbent justice william rehnquist to replace burger as chief justice justices .
after rehnquist 's confirmation , the president named antonin scalia to fill the vacancy .
reagan 's final opportunity to fill a vacancy arose in mid-1987 , when associate justice lewis f . powell , jr . announced his retirement .
reagan chose robert bork as the new jurist .
she was strongly opposed by civil and women 's rights groups , and by senate democrats .
the nomination was rejected by a vote of 42 – 58 .
soon after reagan announced his intention to nominate douglas ginsburg to the court .
however , before his name was submitted to the senate , ginsburg withdrew from consideration .
powell was confirmed as the next president .
reagan appointed 83 judges to the united states courts of appeals , and 290 judges to the united states district courts .
early in his presidency , reagan appointed clarence m . pendleton , jr . as the first african-american to chair the united states commission on civil rights .
pendleton tried to steer the commission into a conservative direction in line with reagan 's views on social and civil rights policy during his tenure from 1981 until his sudden death in 1988 .
pendleton soon aroused the ire of many civil rights advocates and feminists .
reagan was assaulted by an anti-nuclear protester during luncheon speech on april 13,1992 .
the protester , richard springer , smashed a 2-foot-high £ 60 cm diameter 30-pound pound pound statue of an eagle that the broadcasters had given the former president .
pieces of glass hit reagan , but he was not injured .
springer announced that he planned to announce government plans for an underground nuclear weapons test in the nevada desert the next day .
springer was the founder of an anti-nuclear group called the " 100th monkey " .
following his arrest on assault charges , a secret service spokesman could not explain how springer got past the agents who guarded reagan 's life at all times .
springer pled guilty to reduced charges and said he didn ’ t meant to hurt reagan through his actions .
he pled guilty to a misdemeanor federal charge of interfering with the secret service , but other felony charges of assault and fighting against officers were dropped .
after leaving office in 1989 , the reagans bought a home in bel air , los angeles , in addition to the reagan ranch in santa barbara .
they regularly attended bel air church and occasionally made appearances on behalf of the republican party .
it was dedicated to the public on november 4,1991 .
five presidents and six first ladies attended the opening ceremonies .
the brady bill was a constitutional amendment requiring a balanced budget .
in 1992 , reagan created the ronald reagan freedom award with the newly formed ronald reagan presidential foundation .
his last public appearance was at the funeral of richard nixon on april 27,1994 .
in 1994 , reagan was diagnosed with alzheimer 's disease .
after his diagnosis , many people sent letters of support from well-wishers to his california home .
there was also speculation that reagan had showed symptoms of mental degeneration .
reagan greeted his secretary of housing and urban development samuel pierce by saying " how are you , mr . mayor ?
how are things in your city ? " ,
later , he realized his mistake .
in a 2011 book , reagan 's son ron said he had suspected early signs of his father 's dementia as early as 1984 .
former cbs white house correspondent lesley stahl remembers that in her final meeting with the president in 1986 , reagan did not seem to know who stahl was .
stahl came close to reporting that reagan was senile , but at the end of the meeting , he regained his alertness .
all four of reagan 's white house doctors said that they saw no evidence of alzheimer 's while he was president .
daniel ruge , a neurosurgeon who served as physician to the president from 1981 to 1985 , said that he never detected signs of the disease while speaking almost every day with reagan .
john e . hutton , who served from 1985 to 1989 , said the president " absolutely " did not " show any signs of dementia or alzheimer 's " .
former chief of staff james baker said that reagan slept during cabinet meetings .
other staff members , former aides , and friends said they saw no indication of alzheimer 's while he was president .
reagan had many memory lapses , but mostly with names .
reagan 's doctors said that he began showing overt symptoms of the illness in late 1992 or 1993 , several years after he had left office .
reagan repeated a toast to margaret thatcher , with identical words and gestures , at his 82nd birthday party on february 6,1993 .
reagan suffered an episode of head trauma in july 1989 .
after being thrown from a horse in mexico , a subdural hematoma was found and surgically treated later in the year .
nancy reagan said that her husband 's 1989 fall hastened the onset of alzheimer 's disease .
ruge said it is possible that the horse accident affected reagan 's memory .
as the years went on , the disease slowly destroyed reagan 's mental capacity .
he was only able to recognize a few people , including his wife nancy .
he took walks through parks near his home and on beaches , played golf regularly , and until 1999 he often went to his office in nearby century city .
reagan suffered a fall at his bel air home on january 13,2001 , resulting in a broken hip .
the fracture was repaired the following day , and the 89-year-old reagan returned home later that week , although he faced difficult physical therapy at home .
on february 6,2001 , reagan reached the age of 90 .
reagan 's public appearances became much less frequent with the progression of the disease .
she told cnn 's larry king in 2001 that very few visitors were allowed to see her husband because she felt that " ronnie would want people to remember him as he was . "
after her husband 's diagnosis and death , nancy became a stem-cell research advocate .
reagan died of pneumonia complicated by alzheimer 's disease in los angeles , california , aged 85 .
a short time after his death , nancy reagan released a statement saying , " my family and i would like the world to know that president ronald reagan has died after 10 years of alzheimer 's disease at 93 years of age .
we appreciate everyone 's prayers . "
speaking in paris , france , president george w . bush called reagan 's death " a sad hour in the life of america . "
he also declared june 11 a national day of mourning .
reagan 's body was taken to the kingsley and gates funeral home in santa monica , california .
on june 7 , his body was transferred to the ronald reagan presidential library .
reagan 's body lay in the library lobby until june 9 .
on june 9 , reagan 's body was flown to washington , dc .
on june 11 , a state funeral was held in washington national cathedral , presided over by president george w . bush .
former prime minister of the united kingdom margaret thatcher , former canadian prime minister brian mulroney , and both presidents bush and george w . bush gave eulogies .
mikhail gorbachev and many world leaders , including prince charles , representing his mother queen elizabeth ii , german chancellor gerhard schroder , italian prime minister silvio berlusconi , and interim presidents hamid karzai of afghanistan and ghazi al-yawer of iraq .
after the funeral , reagan was flown back to the ronald w . reagan presidential library in simi valley , california .
reagan was the longest-lived president in u . s . history , having lived 93 years and 120 days logged 2 years , 8 months , and 23 days longer than john adams .
he was the first president to die in the 21st century .
reagan 's burial site is inscribed with the words he delivered at the opening of the ronald reagan presidential library : " i know in my heart that man is good , that what is right will always eventually triumph and that there is purpose and worth to each and every life " .
since reagan left office in 1989 , there has been a lot of debate among scholars , historians , and the general public around his legacy .
supporters have pointed to a more efficient and prosperous economy as a result of reagan 's economic policies , foreign policy triumphs including a peaceful end to the cold war , and restoration of american pride and morale .
they say that he had an unabated and passionate love for the united states which restored faith in the american dream , after a decline in american confidence and self-respect under jimmy carter 's perceived weak leadership , particularly during the iran hostage crisis , as well as his gloomy , dreary outlook for the future of the united states during the 1980 election .
they also said that the iran – contra affair made the credibility of the united states .
reagan 's views among the country 's leading policy makers and journalists differ as well .
president of the heritage foundation , edwin feulner , said that reagan " helped create a safer , freer world " and said of his economic policies : " he took an america suffering from ' malaise ' . . and made its citizens believe again in their destiny . "
however , mark weisbrot , co-director of the center for economic and policy research , contended that reagan 's " economic policies were mostly a failure " while howard kurtz of " the washington post " opined that reagan was " a far more controversial figure in his time than the largely gushing obits on television would suggest . "
despite the continuing debate surrounding his legacy , many conservative and liberal scholars agree that reagan has been the most influential president since franklin d . roosevelt .
since he left office , historians have reached a consensus , as presented by british historian m . j . heale , who finds that reagan rehabilitated conservatism , turned the nation to the right , practiced a considerably pragmatic conservatism that balanced ideology and the constraints of exceptionalism , faith in the cold war and exceptionalism .
most of whom opposed his policies ranked reagan in terms of leadership in comparison with all 42 presidents .
he was ranked number nine in international relations .
reagan 's major achievement was that the ussr and communism collapsed , causing the u . s . to become the world 's only superpower .
his admirers say he won the cold war .
after 40 years of high tension , the ussr pulled back in the last years of reagan 's second term .
in 1989 , the kremlin lost control of all its east european satellites .
in 1991 , communism was overthrown in the ussr , and on december 26,1991 , the soviet union ceased to exist .
the resulting states were no threat to the united states .
reagan 's exact role is debated , with many believing that reagan 's defense policies , economic policies , military policies and hard-line rhetoric against the soviet union and communism-together with his summits with general secretary gorbachev .
he was the first president to reject containment and detente .
. . the soviet economy could not endure such competition . "
reagan 's aggressive rhetoric toward the ussr had mixed effects .
general secretary gorbachev said that he was a man who was important in bringing about the end of the cold war , and said that he was " a great president . "
gorbachev does not acknowledge a win or loss in the war , but rather a peaceful end ; he said he was not intimidated by reagan 's harsh rhetoric .
thatcher said that the soviet union had an insatiable drive for military power .
she later said that " ronald reagan had a higher claim than any other leader to have won the cold war for liberty and he did it without a shot being fired . "
brian mulroney , former prime minister of canada , said that " he enters history as a strong and dramatic player in the cold war . "
former president lech wałesa of poland acknowledged , " reagan was one of the world leaders who made a major contribution to communism 's collapse . "
professor jeffrey knopf has argued that reagan 's leadership was one of the causes of the end of the cold war .
president harry s . truman 's policy of containment was also regarded as a force behind the fall of the ussr , and the soviet invasion of afghanistan undermined the soviet system .
reagan reshaped the republican party , led the modern conservative movement , and changed the political dynamic of the united states .
more men voted republican under reagan , and reagan tapped into religious voters .
reagan was the first president of the united states to be elected after president barack obama 's death .
reagan left office in 1989 .
this was the highest rating for a departing president in the modern era .
after leaving office , reagan became an iconic influence within the republican party .
his policies and beliefs have been frequently used by republican presidential candidates since 1988 .
the 2008 republican presidential candidates were no exception .
republican nominee john mccain frequently said that he came to office as “ a foot soldier in the reagan revolution . ”
reagan 's most famous statement regarding the role of smaller government was that " government is not a solution to our problem , government is the problem " .
praise for reagan 's accomplishments was part of standard gop rhetoric a quarter century after his retirement .
" washington post " reporter carlos lozada said that the main republican contenders in the 2016 presidential race adopted standard gop gipper worship .
the period of american history most dominated by reagan and his policies concerned taxes , welfare , defense , the federal judiciary and the cold war is known today as the reagan era .
this time period emphasized that the conservative " reagan revolution " led by reagan , had a permanent impact on the united states in domestic and foreign policy .
the bill clinton administration is often treated as an extension of the reagan era , as is the george w . bush administration .
historian eric foner noted that the obama candidacy in 2008 " aroused a great deal of wishful thinking among those yearning for a change after nearly thirty years of reaganism . "
according to chuck raasch , " reagan transformed the presidency in ways that only a few have been able to . "
he defined the political agenda of the times , and suggested lower taxes , a conservative economic philosophy , and a stronger military .
his role in the cold war made his image as a different kind of leader .
reagan 's " avuncular style , optimism , and plain-folks demeanor " also helped him turn " government-bashing into an art form . "
in 1989 , reagan became more popular .
gallup polls in 2001 and 2007 ranked him number one or number two when correspondents were asked for the greatest president in history .
reagan ranked third of post-world war ii presidents in a 2007 rasmussen reports poll , fifth in an abc 2000 poll , ninth in another 2007 rasmussen poll , and eighth in a late 2008 poll by british newspaper " the times " .
in a siena college survey of over 200 historians , however , reagan ranked sixteenth out of 42 .
while the debate about reagan 's legacy is ongoing , the 2009 annual " c-span survey of presidential leaders " ranked reagan the 10th greatest president .
reagan was ranked number 11 in 2000 .
in 2011 , the institute for the study of the americas released the first ever british academic survey to rate us presidents .
this poll of british historians in american history and politics said that reagan was the eighth greatest american president .
reagan 's ability to talk about real issues with understandable terms and to focus on mainstream american concerns earned him the nickname " the great communicator . "
reagan said , " i won the nickname the great communicator .
but i never thought it was my style that made a difference — it was the content .
i was a great communicator , but i communicated great things . "
his age and soft-spoken speech gave him a warm grandfatherly image .
reagan earned the nickname " the teflon president " .
according to colorado congresswoman patricia schroeder , who coined the phrase , and reporter howard kurtz , the name referred to reagan 's ability to " do almost anything wrong and not get blamed for it . "
reagan was always mixed .
he was the oldest president up to that time .
reagan did not get well with minority groups , especially african-americans .
however , his support of israel throughout his presidency earned him support from many jews .
he was the first president to have been divorced .
the combination of reagan 's speaking style , unabashed patriotism , negotiation skills , as well as his use of the media , played an important role in defining the 1980s and his future legacy .
reagan was known to joke frequently during his lifetime .
he is often called " classic quips " and " legendary . "
among the most notable of his jokes was one about the cold war .
reagan made the following joke : " my fellow americans , i 'm pleased to tell you today that i 've signed legislation that will outlaw russia forever .
we begin bombing in five minutes .
former aide david gergen said , " it was that humor . . that i think endeared people to reagan . "
he also had the ability to give comfort and hope to the nation as a whole at times of tragedy .
the space shuttle challenger exploded on january 28,1986 .
reagan addressed the nation .
reagan received many awards in his pre-and post-presidential years .
reagan was elected into the national speakers association speaker hall of fame .
in 1981 , reagan was honored as a laureate of the lincoln academy of illinois .
in 1982 , he was given the distinguished service medal from the american legion .
in 1983 , he received the highest distinction of the scout association of japan , the golden pheasant award .
in 1989 , reagan was made an honorary knight grand cross of the order of the bath , one of the highest british orders giving him to use of the post-nominal letters " gcb " but as a foreign national , not to be known as " sir ronald reagan " ; only two u . s . presidents have received this honor since then .
reagan was named an honorary fellow of keble college , oxford .
japan awarded him the grand cordon of the order of the chrysanthemum in 1989 .
in 1990 , reagan was awarded the wppac 's top honor prize because he signed the intermediate-range nuclear forces treaty with h . e . mikhail sergeyevich gorbachevchevchev ¥ , then president of russia , ending the cold war .
on january 18,1993 , reagan received the presidential medal of freedom recipients with distinctionrford .
reagan was also awarded the republican senatorial medal of freedom .
the airport was renamed ronald reagan washington national airport by a bill signed into law by president bill clinton .
the ronald reagan building and international trade center was dedicated in washington , d . c .
he was among 18 included in gallup 's most admired man and woman poll of the 20th century , from a poll conducted in the u . s . in 1999 ; two years later , was christened by nancy reagan and the united states navy .
it is the first aircraft carrier to be named in honor of a living former president .
in 1998 , the u . s . navy memorial foundation awarded reagan its naval heritage award for his support of the u . s . navy and military in both his movie career and while he served as president .
the house was approved by congress to allow the ronald reagan boyhood home in dixon , illinois in 2002 pending federal purchase of the property .
on may 16 , reagan received the congressional gold medal .
after reagan 's death , the united states postal service issued a president ronald reagan commemorative postage stamp in 2005 .
later in the year , cnn , along with the editors of " time " magazine , named him the " most fascinating person " of the network 's first 25 years .
the discovery channel asked its viewers to vote for the greatest american in june 2005 .
in 2006 , reagan was added into the california hall of fame , located at the california museum .
every year from 2002 , california governors gray davis and arnold schwarzenegger declared february 6 " ronald reagan day " in the state of california in honor of their most famous predecessor .
in 2010 , schwarzenegger signed senate bill 944 , authored by senator george runner , to make every february 6 ronald reagan day in california .
in 2007 , president lech kaczynski gave reagan the order of the white eagle .
reagan supported the anti-communist solidarity movement , along with pope john paul ii .
on june 3,2009 , nancy reagan made a statue of her late husband in the united states capitol rotunda .
the statue is in the national statuary hall collection .
after reagan 's death , both major american political parties agreed to erect a statue of reagan in the place of thomas starr king .
president obama signed the ronald reagan centennial commission act into law .
on july 4,2011 , a statue of reagan was presented in london , england , outside the u . s . embassy in grosvenor square .
former secretary of state condoleezza rice took her place and read a statement on her behalf .
during reagan 's presidency , margaret thatcher , was also unable to attend due to poor health .
