death of a hero is a novel by richard aldington .
it was his first novel , published in 1929 .
" death of a hero " is a story by george winterbourne .
the story is told by an unnamed narrator who claims to have known and served with the main character .
the story is divided into three parts .
the first part is about george 's family history .
his father marries a poor woman who believes she is marrying into a monied family .
george 's mother has a series of lovers .
the portrait of george 's parents is believed to be based on his own parents , whom he disliked .
one critic called the characters parodic monsters .
george is a member of the english society .
he is encouraged to learn his father 's insurance business , but fails to do so .
he moved to london to become an artist and live a socialite lifestyle .
the second section of the book deals with george 's life .
he ingrains himself in socialite society .
they decide to marry .
although they do not have a child , the marriage endures .
they decide to leave their marriage open .
george takes her close friend as a lover , but his marriage begins to fall apart .
england declares war on germany .
george decides to enlist .
aldington 's portrayal of society contains " clumsily satirical portraits " of t . s . eliot and ezra pound , both of whom were close friends .
george trains for the army .
no particular location in france is mentioned .
the town behind the front where george spends much of his time is referred to as m -oom .
he fights on the front for some time .
when he returns home , he finds that he has been so affected by the war that he belonged to his friends , including his wife and lover .
the casualty rate among officers is very high at the front .
when a number of officers in george 's unit are killed , he is promoted .
when he is spending time with the other officers , he finds them to be cynical and utilitarian .
he loses faith in the war quickly .
george standing up during a machine gun barrage .
at the end of the book there is a poem written from the point of view of a veteran comparing world war i to the trojan war .
aldington was a veteran of world war i .
it contained extensive colloquial speech , including profanity , discussion of sexuality and graphic descriptions of the war and of trench life .
there was extensive censorship in england and many war novels had been banned or burned .
when aldington first published his novel , he revised a number of passages to ensure the publication of his book would not be challenged .
he insisted that his publishers include a disclaimer in the original printing of the book with the following text : to my astonishment , my publisher informed me that words , phrases , sentences , and even passages , are at present taboo in england .
i have recorded nothing which i have not observed in human life , said nothing i do not believe to be true .
the publishers are removing what they believe would be considered objectionable , and are placing asterisks to show where omissions have been made .
my opinion it is better for the book to appear mutilated than for me to say what i don ’ t believe .
