the secretary of state is a senior official of the federal government of the united states of america .
the secretary of state is nominated by the president of the united states .
the secretary of state , along with the secretary of the treasury , secretary of defense , and attorney general , are generally regarded as the four most important cabinet members because of the importance of their departments .
secretary of state is a level i position in the executive schedule .
mike pompeo is the current secretary of state since april 2018 .
he replaced rex tillerson , who was fired by donald trump on march 13,2018 .
tillerson 's last day at the state department was march 31,2018 .
he was confirmed by the united states senate on april 26,2018 .
most of the domestic functions of the department of state have been transferred to other agencies .
those that remain include keeping and use of the great seal of the united states , performance of protocol functions for the white house , and the drafting of certain proclamations .
the secretary also negotiates with the united states over the extradition of fugitives to foreign countries .
under federal law , the resignation of a president or of a vice president is only valid if declared in writing , in an instrument delivered to the office of the secretary of state .
accordingly , the resignations in disgrace of president richard nixon and of vice president spiro agnew were formalized in instruments delivered to secretary of state henry kissinger .
the secretary of state is the third-highest official of the federal government of the united states , after the president and vice president .
six secretaries of state have gone on to be elected president .
other candidates , including henry clay , william seward , james blaine , william jennings bryan , john kerry , and hillary clinton , have been unsuccessful presidential candidates .
secretaries of state have a lot of work in travel around the world .
hillary clinton , the president of the united states , is 112 years old .
albright is married to madeleine albright .
the record for most air miles traveled in a secretary is 1,417 , 576 miles by john kerry .
condoleezza rice is also the second largest city in the state .
