schizophrenia is a mental illness .
other symptoms may include false beliefs , unclear or confused thinking , hearing voices that do not exist , reduced social engagement and emotional expression , and lack of motivation .
people with schizophrenia often have other mental health problems .
symptoms typically come on gradually , begin in young adulthood , and , in many cases , never resolve .
schizophrenia may also cause other causes , including environmental and genetic factors .
cannabis is the age of a person 's parents .
genetic factors include common and rare genetic variants .
diagnosis is based on observed behavior , the person 's reported experiences and reports of others familiar with the person .
during diagnosis , a person 's culture must also be taken into account .
as of 2013 , there is no objective test .
schizophrenia does not imply a " split personality " or dissociative identity disorder .
the main treatment of therapy is medication , along with counselling , job training , and social rehabilitation .
it is unclear whether typical or atypical antipsychotics are better .
in people who do not improve with other antipsychotics , clozapine may be tried .
in more serious situations where there is risk to self or others , involuntary hospitalization may be necessary , although hospital stays are now shorter and less frequent than they once were .
about 0.3 % to 0.7 % of people are affected by schizophrenia during their lifetimes .
in 2013 , there were about 23 million cases worldwide .
males are more often affected .
about 20 % of people eventually do well , and a few recover completely .
about 50 % have lifelong impairment .
unemployment , poverty , and homelessness are common .
the average life expectancy of people with the disorder is 10-25 years less than that of the general population .
this is the result of increased physical health problems and a higher suicide rate .
in 2015 , about 17,000 people worldwide died from schizophrenia .
people with schizophrenia may experience hallucinations .
the last may range from loss of train of thought , to sentences only loosely connected in meaning , to speech that is not understood known as word salad .
social withdrawal , sloppiness of dress and hygiene , and loss of motivation and judgment are all common in schizophrenia .
distortions of self-experience such as feeling as if one 's thoughts or feelings are not really one 's own to believing thoughts are being inserted into one 's mind , sometimes termed passivity phenomena , are also common .
there is often a pattern of emotional difficulty , for example , not giving responsiveness .
symptoms of paranoia are affected by schizophrenia .
social isolation is a type of social isolation .
difficulties in working and long term memory , attention , executive functioning , and speed of processing are also common .
in one uncommon subtype , the person may be largely mute , remain motionless in bizarre postures , or display purposeless agitation , all signs of catatonia .
people with schizophrenia often look at the facial emotion perception .
it is unclear if the phenomenon is called " thought blocking " .
about 30 to 50 percent of people with schizophrenia do not accept that they have an illness or comply with their recommended treatment .
there are some insight into this condition .
people with schizophrenia may have a high rate of irritable bowel syndrome , but they often do not mention it unless they asked .
polydipsia is a very common drug in people with schizophrenia .
schizophrenia is often described in terms of positive and negative symptoms .
" positive symptoms " are those that most people do not normally experience , but are present in people with schizophrenia .
they can include delusions , disordered thoughts and speech , and tactile , auditory , visual , olfactory and gustatory hallucinations .
hallucinations are also related to the content of the delusional theme .
positive symptoms are generally treated well to medication .
" negative symptoms " are deficits of normal emotional responses or of other thought processes , and are less responsive to medication .
they often include flat expressions or little emotion , poverty of speech , inability to experience pleasure , lack of desire to form relationships , and lack of motivation .
negative symptoms appear to contribute more to poor quality of life , functional ability , and the burden on others than positive symptoms do .
people with greater negative symptoms often have poor adjustment before the onset of illness , and people with medication is often limited .
the validity of the positive and negative construct has been challenged by factor analysis .
different terms are used , but a dimension for hallucinations , a dimension for disorganization , and a dimension for negative symptoms are usually described .
deficits in cognitive abilities are widely recognized as a main feature of schizophrenia .
the extent of the cognitive deficits someone experiences is a predictor of how functional they will be , the quality of occupational performance , and how successful they will be in maintaining treatment .
the symptoms of cognitive dysfunction are better than positive or negative symptoms .
the deficits impacting the cognitive function are found in a large number of areas : working memory , long-term memory , verbal declarative memory , semantic processing , episodic memory , attention , learning disabilities , and other problems .
deficits in verbal memory are the most common in someone with schizophrenia .
verbal memory impairment has been linked to decreased ability in those with schizophrenia to semantically encodeivation process information relating to meaning parapet .
healthy people with schizophrenia usually remember all words equally , regardless of their meaning .
these deficits have been found in people before the onset of the illness to some extent .
family members of those with schizophrenia and other high-risk people also show a degree of deficit in cognitive abilities , and specifically in working memory .
a review of the literature on cognitive deficits in people with schizophrenia shows that the deficits may be present in early adolescence , or as early as childhood .
the deficits which a person with schizophrenia may remain the same over time in most patients .
most of the research in this domain focuses on methods to improve attention and working memory .
researchers tried to improve learning ability in people with schizophrenia using a high-versus low-reward condition and an instruction-absent or instruction-present condition showed that increasing reward leads to poorer performance while providing instruction leads to improved performance .
training people with schizophrenia to alter their thinking , attention , and language behaviors by using tasks like , engaging in cognitive rehearsal , giving self-instructions , giving coping statements to the self-handle failure , and providing self-reinforcement for success .
this type of training , known as self-instructionalnity sieux training , produced benefits such as lower number of nonsense verbalizations and improved recall when distracted .
late adolescence and early adulthood are the period for the onset of schizophrenia , critical years in a young adult 's social and vocational development .
in 40 % of men and 23 % of women diagnosed with schizophrenia , the condition manifested itself before the age of 19 .
the most general symptoms of schizophrenia are between ages 16 and 30 .
the onset of the disorder is between ages 18 and 25 for men and between 25 and 35 for women .
to reduce the developmental disruption associated with schizophrenia , much work has recently been done to identify and treat the prodromal aarhus phase of the disorder , which has been detected up to 30 months before the onset of symptoms .
people who go on to develop schizophrenia may experience transient or self-limiting psychotic symptoms and the non-specific symptoms of social withdrawal , irritability , dysphoria , and clumsiness before the onset of the disease .
children who go on to develop schizophrenia may also demonstrate decreased intelligence , decreased motor development .
a combination of genetic and environmental factors play a role in the development of schizophrenia .
people with a family history of schizophrenia who have a small family psychosis have a 20-40 percent chance of being diagnosed one year later .
about 80 % of the individual differences in risk to schizophrenia are associated with genetics .
these estimates vary because of the difficulty in separating genetic and environmental influences .
more than 40 % of monozygotic twins of those with schizophrenia are also affected .
if one parent is affected , the risk is about 13 % .
results of gene studies of schizophrenia have generally failed to find consistent associations .
many genes are known to be involved in schizophrenia , each of small effect and unknown transmission and expression .
the summation of these effect sizes into a polygenic risk score can explain at least 7 % of the variability in liability for schizophrenia .
about 5 % of cases of schizophrenia are attributable to rare copy number variants variants variants variants variantschaft cnvsborough .
these rare cnvs increase the risk of someone developing the disorder by as much as 20-fold .
there is a genetic relation between the common variants which cause schizophrenia and bipolar disorder .
the question of how schizophrenia could be primarily genetically influenced , given that people with schizophrenia have lower fertility rates is a paradox .
it is expected that genetic variants that increase the risk of schizophrenia would be selected against due to their negative effects on reproductive fitness .
a number of possible explanations have been proposed , including that alleles associated with schizophrenia risk confers a fitness advantage in unaffected individuals .
other evidence suggests that a large number of alleles each contributing a small amount can persist .
environmental factors associated with the development of schizophrenia include the living environment , drug use , and prenatal stressors .
maternal stress has been associated with an increase in schizophrenia , possibly in association with reelin .
maternal nutritional deficiency , such as those observed during a famine , as well as maternal obesity have also been identified as possible risk factors for schizophrenia .
both maternal stress and infection have been shown to alter fetal neurodevelopment through pro-inflammatory proteins such as il-8 and tnf .
parenting style seems to have no major effect , although people with supportive parents do better than those with critical or hostile parents .
childhood trauma , death of a parent , and being bullied or abused increase the risk of psychosis .
living in an urban environment during childhood or as an adult has consistently been found to increase the risk of schizophrenia by a factor of two , even after taking into account drug use , ethnic group , and size of social group .
other factors that play an important role include social isolation and immigration related to social adversity , racial discrimination , family dysfunction , unemployment , and poor housing conditions .
in some people , development of schizophrenia is related to intestinal tract dysfunction .
a subgroup of persons with schizophrenia present an immune response to gluten different from that found in people with celiac .
about half of people with schizophrenia use drugs or alcohol too .
amphetamine , cocaine , and to a lesser extent alcohol , can result in a transient stimulant psychosis or alcohol-related psychosis that presents very similarly to schizophrenia .
people with schizophrenia use nicotine at much higher rates than the general population .
alcohol abuse can cause a serious , substance-induced psychotic disorder .
alcohol use may be caused by an early onset of psychosis .
cannabis may be a contributory factor in schizophrenia , which may cause the disease in those who are already at risk .
the higher risk may require the presence of certain genes within an individual .
among those who are at risk of psychosis , it is associated with twice the rate .
other drugs may be used as coping mechanisms by people who have schizophrenia , to deal with depression , anxiety , boredom , and loneliness .
factors such as hypoxia and infection , or stress and lack of malnutrition in the mother during pregnancy , may result in a slight increase in the risk of schizophrenia later in life .
people diagnosed with schizophrenia are more likely to have been born in winter or springtime at least in the northern hemispherengo .
the increased risk is about 5 to 8 percent .
other infections during pregnancy or around the time of birth include " toxoplasma gondi " and " chlamydia " .
viral infections of the brain during childhood are also linked to a risk of psychosis during adulthood .
the mechanism of schizophrenia is unknown .
one of the most common is the dopamine hypothesis .
other possible mechanisms include glutaminergic neurotransmission and neurodevelopment .
frameworks have hypotheses of connection between biological abnormalities and symptoms .
abnormal dopamine signalling has been implicated in schizophrenia based on the usefulness of medications that effect the dopamine receptor .
abnormalities in dopamine signalling have been thought to be underlie delusions .
a decrease in d receptors in the prefrontal cortex may also be responsible for deficits in working memory .
reduced nmda receptor signalling is suggested by multiple lines of evidence .
studies show that nmda receptor expression and nmda receptor blockers mimic both schizophrenia symptoms and the physiological abnormalities associated with schizophrenia .
post-mortem studies consistently find that a subset of these neurons fail to express gad67 , in addition to abnormalities in morphology .
the subsets of interneurons that are abnormal in schizophrenia are responsible for the synchronizing of neural ensembles that is necessary during working memory tasks .
both working memory tasks and gamma oscillations are impaired in schizophrenia .
evidence suggests that schizophrenia has a neurodevelopmental component .
before schizophrenia , there is often problems in cognition , social functioning , and motor skills .
problems before birth such as maternal infection , and complications during pregnancy all increase risk for schizophrenia .
schizophrenia usually happens 18-25 , a period that is associated with certain stages of neurodevelopment .
deficits in executive functions , such as planning , inhibition , and working memory , are pervasive in schizophrenia .
although these functions are dissociable , their dysfunction in schizophrenia may reflect an underlying deficit in the ability to represent goal related information in working memory , and to use this to direct cognition and behavior .
these impairments have been linked to a number of neuroimaging and neuropathological abnormalities .
for example , functional neuroimaging studies report evidence of reduced neural processing efficiency .
these abnormalities may be linked to the consistent post-mortem finding of reduced neuropil .
these cell and functional abnormalities may also be shown in structural neuroimaging studies .
positive symptoms have been linked to reduced cortical thickness in the superior temporal lobe , and orbitofrontal cortex , respectively .
anhedonia is a reduced capacity to experience pleasure .
however , a large body of evidence suggests that hedonic responses are intact in schizophrenia .
overall , a failure of online maintenance and reward associativity may lead to impairment in the generation of cognition and behavior required to obtain rewards , despite normal hedonic responses .
bayesian models of brain functioning have been used to link abnormalities in cellular functioning to symptoms .
both hallucinations and delusions have been suggested to reflect improper encoding of prior expectations .
in canonical models of circuits that mediate predictive coding , hypoactive nmda receptor activation , similar to that seen in schizophrenia , could predict that symptoms of schizophrenia .
schizophrenia is diagnosed based on criteria in either the american psychiatric association 's greaves apa aarhus fifth edition of the diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders .
these criteria use the self-reported experiences of the person and reported abnormalities in behavior , followed by a clinical assessment by a mental health professional .
symptoms associated with schizophrenia occur along a continuum in the population and must reach a certain severity and level of impairment before a diagnosis is made .
as of 2013 , there is no objective test .
in 2013 , the american psychiatric association released the fifth edition of the dsm ( dsm-5 transcript .
to be diagnosed with schizophrenia , two criteria have to be met over much of the time of a period of at least one month , with a significant impact on social or occupational functioning for at least six months .
the person had to be suffering from delusions , hallucinations , or disorganized speech .
a second symptom could be negative symptoms , or severely disorganized or catatonic behaviour .
the definition of schizophrenia remained essentially the same as that specified by the 2000 version of dsm ( dsm-iv-trower , but dsm-5 makes a number of changes .
the icd-10 criteria are typically used in european countries .
the icd-10 criteria are based on schneiderian first-rank symptoms .
in practice , agreement between two systems is high .
the icd-11 criteria for schizophrenia suggest that self-disorder should be a symptom .
if signs of disturbance are present for more than a month but less than six months , the diagnosis of schizophreniform disorder is applied .
psychotic symptoms lasting less than a month may be diagnosed as brief psychotic disorder .
if the symptoms are the direct physiological result of a general medical condition or a substance , then the diagnosis is one of a psychosis secondary to that condition .
schizophrenia is diagnosed if symptoms of pervasive developmental disorder are present unless prominent delusions or hallucinations are also present .
with the publication of dsm-5 , the apa removed all sub-classifications of schizophrenia .
psychotic symptoms may be present in several other mental disorders , including borderline personality disorder , drug intoxication , and drug-induced psychosis .
delusionsloid 's syndrome are also present in delusionsal disorder , and social withdrawal in social anxiety disorder , avoidant personality disorder and schizotypal personality disorder .
schizotypal personality disorder has symptoms that are similar but less severe than schizophrenia .
schizophrenia occurs along with obsessive-compulsive disorder disorder disorder disorder disorder disordericative ocd considerably more often than could be explained by chance , although it can be difficult to tell the difference between obsessions that occur in ocd from the delusions of schizophrenia .
a few people who withdraw from benzodiazepines have a severe withdrawal syndrome .
it can look like schizophrenia .
a more general medical and neurological examination may be needed to rule out medical illnesses which may rarely produce psychotic schizophrenia-like symptoms .
dementias such as alzheimer 's disease , huntington 's disease , frontotemporal dementia , and the lewy body dementia may also be related to schizophrenia-like symptoms .
it may be necessary to rule out a delirium , which can be distinguished by visual hallucinations , acute onset and fluctuating level of consciousness , and indicates an underlying medical illness .
there is a specific " medical " indication or possible adverse effects from antipsychotic medication .
in children hallucinations , people may have to get separated from normal childhood fantasies .
prevention of schizophrenia is difficult .
there is no clear evidence that early interventions to prevent schizophrenia .
there is some evidence that early treatment in those with a psychotic episode may improve short-term outcomes , but there is little benefit from these measures after five years .
attempting to prevent schizophrenia in the prodrome phase is of uncertain benefit .
cognitive behavioral therapy may reduce the risk of psychosis in those at high risk after a year .
another measure is to avoid drugs that have been associated with development of the disorder , including cannabis , cocaine , and amphetamines .
the main treatment of schizophrenia is antipsychotic medications .
hospitalization may occur for severe episodes either voluntarily or curated if mental health legislation allows it lunged involuntarily .
long-term hospitalization is uncommon since deinstitutionalization beginning in the 1950s , although it still occurs .
community support services including drop-in centers , visits by members of a community mental health team , supported employment and support groups are common .
some evidence suggests that regular exercise has a positive effect on the physical and mental health of those with schizophrenia .
as of 2015 it is unclear if transcranial magnetic stimulation exceeds tms ) is useful for schizophrenia .
the first-line psychiatric treatment for schizophrenia is antipsychotic medication .
however , people who are not treated improve the symptoms of depression and have problems with the brain .
in people who are on antipsychotic , the person who has suffered from chronic obsessive -lrb- anti-drug -rrb- causes , decreases the risk of getting relapse .
there is little evidence about how long they are used .
dopamine hypersensitivity increases the risk of symptoms if antipsychotics are stopped .
the choice of which antipsychotic to use is based on benefits , risks , and costs .
it is debatable whether , as a class , typical or atypical antipsychotics are better .
amisulpride , olanzapine , and clozapine may be more effective but are associated with greater side effects .
typical antipsychotic medications have a drop-out and symptom relapse rates to atypicals when used at low to moderate dosages .
there is a good response in 40-50 % , a partial response in 30-40 % , and treatment resistancerned after six weeks to two or three different antipsychotics reacts with 20 % of people .
clozapine is effective treatment for people who respond poorly to other drugs .
some people who have antipsychotic medicines have side effects .
people who have a higher rate of extrapyramidal side effects .
it is most commonly associated with weight gain .
it has a similar rate of extrapyramidal symptoms .
it is unclear whether the newer antipsychotics reduce the chances of developing neuroleptic malignant syndrome or tardive dyskinesia , a rare but serious neurological disorder .
for people who are unwilling or unable to take drugs regularly , long-acting depot preparations of antipsychotics may be used to achieve control .
they reduce the risk of getting relapse .
when used together with treatment of mental interventions , they may improve long-term adherence to treatment .
the american psychiatric association says that stopping antipsychotics in some people if there are no symptoms for more than a year .
a number of psychosocial interventions may be useful in the treatment of schizophrenia .
family therapy or education , which addresses the whole family of a patient , may reduce relapses and hospitalizations .
evidence for the effectiveness of cognitive behavioral therapy – cbtraction in either reducing symptoms or preventing relapse is minimal .
evidence for metacognitive training is mixed with some reviews finding benefit and another not .
art or drama therapy has not been researched .
peer support is of unclear benefit in schizophrenia .
schizophrenia has great human and economic costs .
it results in a decreased life expectancy by 10 – 25 years .
this is mainly because of its association with obesity , poor diet , sedentary lifestyles , and smoking .
antipsychotic medications may also increase the risk of getting the drugs .
these changes in life expectancy increased between the 1970s and 1990s .
schizophrenia is a major cause of disability .
approximately three-fourths of people with schizophrenia have a disability with relapses and 16.7 million people globally are considered to have moderate or severe disability from the condition .
some people do not recover completely .
most people with schizophrenia live separately with community support .
about 85 % are unemployed .
paranoid schizophrenia may have a better possibility than other types of schizophrenia for independent living and occupational functioning .
in people with a first episode of psychosis a good long-term outcome occurs in 42 % , an intermediate outcome in 35 % and a poor outcome in 27 % .
outcomes for schizophrenia are better in developing countries than the developed world .
these conclusions have been questioned .
there is a higher than average suicide rate associated with schizophrenia .
this has been cited at 10 % , but a more recent analysis revises the estimate to 4.9 % , most often occurring in the period following first hospital admission .
20 to 40 % secretly try to kill themselves at least once .
there are many risk factors , including male gender , depression , and a high intelligence quotient .
schizophrenia and smoking have shown a strong association in studies worldwide .
use of cigarettes is especially high in those diagnosed with schizophrenia .
those who smoke tend to smoke heavily , and also smoke cigarettes with high nicotine content .
some say that this is in an effort to improve symptoms .
among people with schizophrenia use of cannabis is also common .
schizophrenia affects around 0.3 % of people at some point in their lives , or 24 million people worldwide as of 2011 .
it occurs 1.4 times more frequently in males than females .
onset in childhood is much rarer , as begins in middle or old age .
despite the prior belief that schizophrenia occurs at similar rates worldwide , its frequency varies across the world , within countries , and at the local level .
this variation has been estimated to be fivefold .
it causes approximately one percent of worldwide disability adjusted life years .
the rate of schizophrenia varies depending on how it is defined .
in 2000 , the world health organization found the percentage of people affected .
about 1 % of adults have schizophrenia in the united states .
in the early 20th century , the psychiatrist kurt schneider listed the forms of psychotic symptoms that he thought distinguished schizophrenia from other psychotic disorders .
these are called " first-rank symptoms " or schneider 's first-rank symptoms .
they include delusions of being controlled by an external force , the belief that thoughts are being inserted into or withdrawn from one 's mind , the belief that one 's thoughts are being broadcast to other people , and hearing hallucinatory voices that comment on one 's thoughts or actions or that have a conversation with other hallucinations .
although they have significantly contributed to the current diagnostic criteria , the specificity of first-rank symptoms has been questioned .
a review of the diagnostic studies conducted between 1970 and 2005 found that they allow neither a reconfirmation nor a rejection of schneider 's claims , and suggested that first-rank symptoms should be de-emphasized in future revisions of diagnostic systems .
the absence of first-rank symptoms should raise suspicion of a medical disorder .
the history of schizophrenia is complex .
accounts of a schizophrenia-like syndrome are rare before the 19th century .
a detailed case report in 1797 concerning james tilly matthews , and accounts by philippe pinel published in 1809 , are regarded as the earliest cases of the illness in the medical and psychiatric literature .
the term dementia praecox was first used by german alienist heinrich schule in 1886 .
in 1893 emil kraepelin took the term from schule and pick .
kraepelin believed that " dementia praecox " was probably caused by a long-term , smouldering systemic or " whole body " disease process that affected many parts of the brain after puberty in a final decisive cascade .
his use of the term " praecox " distinguished it from other forms of dementia such as alzheimer 's disease which usually occur later in life .
the french physician benedict morel is the medical discovery of schizophrenia .
this account ignores the fact that there is little to connect morel 's descriptive use of the term and the independent development of the " dementia praecox " disease concept at the end of the nineteenth century .
the word " schizophrenia " comes from the greek roots " schizein " talukaειν " , " to split " cox " , " phren " , " phren-" φην , " phren-" φην , " phren-" φην , " perception " , and " perception " .
american and british interpretations of bleuler led to the claim that bleuler described its main symptoms as four " a 's : flattened " affect " , " autism " , impaired " association " of ideas , and " ambivalence " .
bleuler realized that the illness was not a dementia , as some of his patients improved rather than got worse , and proposed the term schizophrenia instead .
treatment was revolutionized in the mid-1950s with the development and introduction of chlorpromazine .
in the early 1970s , the criteria for determining schizophrenia were the subject of a number of controversies .
schizophrenia was diagnosed far more often in the united states than in europe .
this was partly due to looser criteria in the united states , which used the dsm-ii manual , contrasting with europe and its icd-9 .
david rosenhan 's 1972 study , published in the journal " science " under the title " on being sane in insane places " , concluded that the diagnosis of schizophrenia in the united states was often unreliable .
these factors led to the revision not only of the diagnosis of schizophrenia , but the revision of the whole dsm manual , resulting in the publication of the dsm-iii in 1980 .
the term schizophrenia is often misunderstood to mean that affected persons have a " split personality " .
although some people diagnosed with schizophrenia may hear voices and may experience the voices as distinct personalities , schizophrenia does not involve a person changing among distinct , multiple personalities .
dissociative identity disorder disorder disorder was also often misdiagnosed as schizophrenia based on the loose criteria in the dsm-ii .
the term was first used in an article by the poet t . s . eliot in 1933 .
other scholars have traced origins .
rather , the term means a " splitting of mental functions " , reflecting the presentation of the illness .
in 2002 , the term for schizophrenia in japan was changed from seishin-bunretsu-byooked [unk] 神 分 [unk] [unk] , lit .
mind-split disease is caused by togo-shitcho-shoguns .
integration disorder helps reduce stigma .
the new name was inspired by the biopsychosocial model .
a similar change was made in south korea in 2012 .
a professor of psychiatry , jim van os , has proposed changing the english term to " psychosis spectrum syndrome " .
in the united states , the cost of schizophrenia was estimated to be $ 62.7 billion in 2002 .
the book and film " a beautiful mind " talks about the life of john forbes nash , a mathematician who won the nobel prize for economics .
people with severe mental illness , including schizophrenia , are at a significantly greater risk of being victims of both violent and non-violent crime .
schizophrenia has been associated with a higher rate of violent acts , but most seem to be related to associated with substance abuse .
rates of homicide linked to psychosis are similar to those linked to substance misuse , and the overall rate in a region .
what role schizophrenia has on violence independent of misuse is controversial , but certain aspects of individual histories or mental states may be factors .
about 11 % of people in prison for homicide have schizophrenia and 21 % have mood disorders .
another study found that about 8-10 % of people with schizophrenia had committed a violent act in the past year compared to 2 % of the general population .
media coverage relating to violent acts by people with schizophrenia helps people with schizophrenia .
in a large , representative sample from a 1999 study , 12.8 % of americans believed that schizophrenia was " very likely " to do something violent against others , and 48.1 % said that they were " somewhat likely " to .
over 74 % of all people with schizophrenia were either " not very able " or " not able at all " to make decisions concerning their treatment .
the perception of people with psychosis as violent has doubled in popularity since the 1950s , according to one meta-analysis .
schizophrenia is not believed to occur in non-human species but it may be possible to develop a pharmacologically induced nonhuman primate model of schizophrenia .
research has found a benefit in using minocycline to treat schizophrenia .
there is not enough evidence yet to make conclusions about its effectiveness .
negative symptoms are a challenge to treat , as they are generally not made better by medication .
various agents have been explored for possible benefits in this area .
there have been trials on drugs with anti-inflammatory activity .
