science fiction abstracts , sometimes called sci-fi or sfoire , is a genre of speculative fiction that has been called the " literature of ideas " .
science fiction is related to fantasy , horror , and superhero fiction .
science fiction " is difficult to define precisely , as it includes a wide range of concepts and themes .
isaac asimov said : " science fiction can be defined as that branch of literature which deals with the reaction of human beings to changes in science and technology . "
according to robert a . heinlein , " a handy short definition of almost all science fiction might read : realistic speculation about possible future events , based solidly on adequate knowledge of the real world , past and present , and on a thorough understanding of the nature and significance of the scientific method . "
tom shippey compared george orwell 's " coming up for air " foley 1939 skull skull # 1 and c . m . kornbluth 's " the space merchants " — 1952 .
lester del rey , " even the devoted aficionado or fan — has a hard time trying to explain what science fiction is , " and that the reason for there not being a " full satisfactory definition " is that " there are no easily delineated limits to science fiction . "
writers in antiquity sometimes dealt with themes common to modern science fiction .
some of the stories from " the arabian nights " , along with the 10th century " the tale of the bamboo cutter " and ibn al-nafis 's 13th-century " theologus autodidactus " , also contain elements of science fiction .
products of the scientific revolution and the age of enlightenment , johannes kepler 's " somnium "riumriumrium 1634lford , francis bacon 's " new atlantis " , and francis bacon 's " new atlantis " .
mary shelley 's " frankenstein " restroom 1818orus wrote about her life , and " the last man " — made it into science fiction .
brian aldiss has argued that " frankenstein " was the first work of science fiction .
jules verne was noted for his scientific accuracy , especially " twenty thousand leagues under the sea " egypt .
in 1887 , the first time machine was invented by enrique gaspar y rimbau .
h . g . wells is one of the most important authors of science fiction .
his notable science-fiction works include " the time machine " ; 1895 , " the island of doctor moreau " — 1896 — 1897 .
his science fiction imagined alien invasion , biological engineering , invisibility , and time travel .
in his non-fiction futurologist works , he predicted the advent of airplanes , military tanks , nuclear weapons , satellite television , and something resembling the world wide web .
in 1926 hugo gernsback published the first american science-fiction magazine , " amazing stories " .
the same year , philip francis nowlan 's buck rogers story , " armageddon 2419 " , also appeared in amazing stories .
george orwell 's " nineteen eighty-four " , published in 1949 , is an important book of science fiction .
in 1957 , " " by the russian writer and paleontologist ivan yefremov presented a view of a future interstellar communist civilization and is considered one of the most important soviet science fiction novels .
the german space opera series perry rhodan , written by various authors , started in 1961 with an account of the first moon landing and has since expanded in space to multiple universes , and in time by billions of years .
it has become the most popular science fiction book series of all time .
the novel was about the theme of human limitations as its characters attempted to study a seemingly intelligent ocean on a newly discovered planet .
1965 's dune , which was a much more complex and detailed imagined future society than had previous science fiction .
it is the literary source of the " blade runner " movie franchise .
in 1976 , c . j . cherryh published " gate of ivrel " and " brothers of earth " , which began her alliance-union universe future history series .
in 1984 , william gibson 's first novel " neuromancer " helped make cyberpunk and the word " cyberspace " .
in 1992 , neal stephenson , a famous writer in the book " snow crash " , published in the united states .
the first , or at least one of the first , recorded science fiction movie is 1902 's " a trip to the moon " , directed by georges melies .
1927 's " metropolis " , directed by fritz lang , is the first science fiction movie .
though not well received in its time , it is now considered a great and influential movie .
in 1954 , " godzilla " , directed by ishiro honda , began the kaiju subgenre of science fiction movie .
the 1963 novel " la planete des singes " by pierre boulle was released to popular and critical acclaim due to its vivid depiction of a post-apocalyptic world in which intelligent humans dominate humans .
george lucas began the " star wars " movie series in 1977 .
the series is often called a space opera .
since the 1980s , science fiction movies , fantasy , horror and superhero movies have dominated hollywood 's big-budget productions .
science fiction movies often " cross-over " with other genres , including animation " big hero 6 "-e "-2008 , " big hero 6 " -lrb- 2008 -rrb- , " big hero 6 " -lrb- 2014 -rrb- , gangsterised in the western part of the city , westernised in the united kingdom , ireland , ireland , and western countries , and western countries .
the first science fiction television program was a thirty-five-minute based play by karel capek .
the first popular science fiction program on american television was captain video and his video rangers .
the twilight zone was the first episode to be shown on television was shown on television from 1959 to 1964 .
it had fantasy , suspense , and horror as well as science fiction .
critics have said it was one of the best tv programs of any genre .
the animated series " the jetsons " , while intended as comedy and only running for one season opener 1962 – 1963 忠 predicted many inventions now in common use : flat-screen televisions , newspapers on a computer-like screen , computer viruses , video chat , video chat , tanning beds , home treadmills , and more .
only mildly successful at first , the series gained popularity through syndication and extraordinary fan interest .
it became a very popular franchise with many movies and television shows , novels , and other works and products .
syfy , launched in 1992 as the sci-fi channel , specializes in science fiction , supernatural horror , and fantasy .
some works predict that new inventions and progress will improve life and society , for instance the stories of arthur c . clarke and " star trek " .
others , such as h . g . wells ' " the time machine " and aldous huxley 's " brave new world " , warn about possible negative consequences .
carl sagan wrote : " many scientists deeply involved in the exploration of the solar system quiver myself among them abstracts were first turned in that direction by science fiction . "
evidence for this widespread influence can be found in trends for writers to employ science fiction as a tool for advocacy and generating cultural insights , as well as for educators when teaching across a range of academic disciplines not limited to the natural sciences .
scholar and science fiction critic george edgar slusser said that science fiction is the one real international literary form we have today .
james cameron 's 2009 movie " avatar " was about the european colonization of the americas .
robots , artificial humans , human clones , and their possible conflicts with human society have all been major themes of science fiction since , at least the publication of shelly 's " frankenstein " .
some critics have seen this as reflecting authors ’ concerns over the social alienation seen in modern society .
some works have illustrated these themes using utopias to explore a society in which gender differences or gender power imbalances do not exist .
libertarian science fiction is about the politics and social order implied by right libertarian philosophies with an emphasis on individualism and private property , and in some cases anti-statism .
university courses on literature and environmental issues may include climate change fiction in their syllabi , and it is often discussed by other media outside of science fiction fandom .
science fiction editor and critic david hartwell wrote : " science fiction ’ s appeal lies in combination of the rational , the believable , with the miraculous .
carl sagan said : “ one of the great benefits of science fiction is that it can convey bits and pieces , hints and phrases , of knowledge unknown or inaccessible to the reader .
isaac asimov said in 1967 that there were changes that happened in the science fiction community : " and because today ’ s real life so resembles day-before-yesterday ’ s fantasy , the old-time fans are restless .
if they admit it or not , is a feeling of disappointment and even outrage that the outer world has invaded their private domain .
they feel the loss of a ' sense of wonder ' because it was once truly confined to ' wonder ' has now become prosaic and mundane .
the study of science fiction , or science fiction studies , is the critical assessment , interpretation , and discussion of science fiction literature , movie , tv shows , new media , fandom , and fan fiction .
science fiction studies began around the turn of the 20th century , but it was not until later that science fiction studies solidified as a discipline with the publication of the academic journals " extrapolation " — " extrapolation " — 1972 foley , and " science fiction studies " at the 1973 nationalsothe , and the establishment of the science fiction foundation .
the field has grown since the 1970s with the establishment of more journals , organizations , and conferences .
some authors , such as tade thompson and jeff vandermeer , have pointed out that stories that focus explicitly on physics , astronomy , mathematics , and engineering tend to be considered " hard " science fiction .
max gladstone defined " hard " science fiction as stories " where the math works , " but pointed out that this ends up with stories that often seem " weirdly dated , " as scientific paradigms shift over time .
michael swanwick dismissed the traditional definition of " hard " sf altogether , instead saying that it was defined by characters striving to solve problems " in the right way – with determination , a touch of stoicism , and the consciousness that the universe is not on his or her side . "
ursula k . leguin also said that the science fiction writers dismiss everything except , well , physics , astronomy and chemistry .
they ’ re not that interested in what human beings do , really .
i draw on the social sciences a great deal . "
mary shelley wrote several science fiction novels including " frankenstein ; or , the modern prometheus "oteric 1818 c10 " .
ursula k . le guin first asked her book " can a science fiction writer write a novel ? "
" i believe that all novels , . . deal with character , and that it is to show character – not to preach doctrines , sing songs , or celebrate the glories of the british empire , that the form of the novel , so clumsy , verbose , and undramatic , so rich , elastic , and alive , has evolved .
orson scott card , best known for his 1985 science fiction novel " ender 's game " , has said that in science fiction the message and intellectual significance of the work is contained within the story itself .
science fiction author gregory benford has said : " sf is perhaps the defining genre of the twentieth century , although its conquering armies are still camped outside the rome of the literary citadels . "
jonathan lethem , in an essay published in the " village voice " entitled " close encounters : the squandered promise of science fiction , " suggested that the point in 1973 when thomas pynchon 's " gravity 's rainbow " was nominated for the nebula award and was passed over in favor of arthur c . clarke 's " rendezvous " .
doris lessing , who was later awarded the nobel prize in literature , wrote a series of five sf novels , " canopus in argos : archives " — 1979 – 1983 .
science fiction is being written , and has been written by diverse authors from around the world .
a controversy about voting slates in the 2015 hugo awards showed tensions in the science fiction community .
the world science fiction society at worldcon voted on by fans ; the nebula award for literature , presented by the science fiction and fantasy writers of america , and voted on by the science fiction and fantasy writers of america , and voted on by the community of authors .
one notable award for science fiction movies and tv programs is the saturn award .
there are other national awards , like canada 's prix aurora awards , regional awards , like the endeavour award presented at orycon for works from the u . s . pacific northwest , and special interest or subgenre awards such as the chesley award for art , presented by the association of science fiction and fantasy artists , or the world fantasy award for fantasy .
the convention 's activities are called " the program " .
they may be associated with an ongoing science fiction convention , or have regular club meetings , or both .
the science fiction and fantasy writers of america temeraire sfwa tortricidae was founded by damon knight in 1965 as a non-profit organization to serve the community of professional science fiction authors .
science fiction fandom is the " community of the literature of ideas , . . the culture in which new ideas emerge and grow before being released into society at large " .
members of this community linux linux , as discussed above , are often in contact with each other at conventions or clubs , through print or online fanzines , or on the internet using websites , mailing lists , and other resources .
sf fandom emerged from the letters column in " amazing stories " magazine .
once they were in regular contact , fans wanted to meet each other , and they organized local clubs .
in the 1930s , the first science fiction conventions gathered fans from a wider area .
in the 1980s , usenet groups greatly expanded the circle of fans online .
most of these websites are small , ephemeral , and / or about topics like sf site and science fictioncore .
the first science fiction fanzine , " the comet " , was published in 1930 .
fanzine printing methods have changed over the decades , from the mimeograph , and the ditto machine , to modern photocopying .
other notable fanzines to win one or more hugo awards include file 770 , mimosa , and plokta .
artists working for fanzines have frequently become famous in the field , including brad w . foster , teddy harvia , and joe mayhew .
forrest j ackerman is credited with first using the term " sci-fi " rbis analogous to the then-trendy " hi-fi "artharthe in 1954 .
as science fiction entered popular culture , writers and fans active in the field came to associate the term with low-budget , low-tech " b-movies , " and with low quality pulp fiction .
by the 1970s , some critics within the field , such as damon knight and terry carr , were using " sci fi " to distinguish hack-work from serious science fiction .
peter nicholls writes that sf is " the preferred abbreviation within the community of sf writers and readers . "