science fiction abstracts , sometimes called sci-fi or sfoire , is a genre of speculative fiction that has been called the " literature of ideas " .
it is about imaginary and futuristic concepts such as time travel , parallel universes , fictional worlds , space exploration , and extraterrestrial life .
it often explores the potential consequences of scientific innovations .
science fiction is related to fantasy , horror , and superhero fiction .
however its exact definition has been disputed .
sci-fi literature , movies , television , and other media have become popular over much of the world .
it is often said to generate a " sense of wonder " .
" science fiction " is difficult to define precisely , as it includes a wide range of concepts and themes .
james blish wrote : " wells used the term originally to cover what we would today call " hard " science fiction .
isaac asimov said : " science fiction can be defined as that branch of literature which deals with the reaction of human beings to changes in science and technology . "
according to robert a . heinlein , " a handy short definition of almost all science fiction might read : realistic speculation about possible future events , based solidly on adequate knowledge of the real world , past and present , and on a thorough understanding of the nature and significance of the scientific method . "
tom shippey compared george orwell 's " coming up for air " foley 1939 skull skull # 1 and c . m . kornbluth 's " the space merchants " — 1952 .
lester del rey , " even the devoted aficionado or fan — has a hard time trying to explain what science fiction is , " and that the reason for there not being a " full satisfactory definition " is that " there are no easily delineated limits to science fiction . "
damon knight wrote the story of the book , saying " science fiction is what we point to when we say it . "
mark c . glassey said that science fiction was the same as the definition of " pornography " : " i know it when i see it . "
science fiction is a genre of science fiction .
writers in antiquity sometimes dealt with themes common to modern science fiction .
science fiction began in ancient times when the line between myth and fact were blurred .
the book contains many themes and tropes that are characteristic of modern science fiction .
it is the first science fiction book .
some of the stories from " the arabian nights " , along with the 10th century " the tale of the bamboo cutter " and ibn al-nafis 's 13th-century " theologus autodidactus " , also contain elements of science fiction .
products of the scientific revolution and the age of enlightenment , johannes kepler 's " somnium "riumriumrium 1634lford , francis bacon 's " new atlantis " , and francis bacon 's " new atlantis " .
isaac asimov and carl sagan thought " somnium " was the first science fiction story .
mary shelley 's " frankenstein " restroom 1818orus wrote about her life , and " the last man " — made it into science fiction .
brian aldiss has argued that " frankenstein " was the first work of science fiction .
edgar allan poe wrote several stories considered science fiction .
jules verne was noted for his scientific accuracy , especially " twenty thousand leagues under the sea " egypt .
in 1887 , the first time machine was invented by enrique gaspar y rimbau .
h . g . wells is one of the most important authors of science fiction .
his notable science-fiction works include " the time machine " ; 1895 , " the island of doctor moreau " — 1896 — 1897 .
his science fiction imagined alien invasion , biological engineering , invisibility , and time travel .
in his non-fiction futurologist works , he predicted the advent of airplanes , military tanks , nuclear weapons , satellite television , and something resembling the world wide web .
the series was set on mars and featured john carter as the hero .
in 1926 hugo gernsback published the first american science-fiction magazine , " amazing stories " .
in 1928 , e . e . " doc " smith 's first published work , " the skylark of space " , was written in collaboration with lee hawkins garby , appeared in " amazing stories " .
it is often called the first great space opera .
the same year , philip francis nowlan 's buck rogers story , " armageddon 2419 " , also appeared in amazing stories .
this was followed by a buck rogers comic strip , the first serious science fiction comic .
in 1937 , john w . campbell became editor of " astounding science fiction " .
isaac asimov started his foundation series in 1942 .
the golden age ended in 1946 , but sometimes the late 1940s and the 1950s are included .
george orwell 's " nineteen eighty-four " , published in 1949 , is an important book of science fiction .
theodore sturgeon 's " more than human "arth explored 1953 suggested future human evolution .
in 1957 , " " by the russian writer and paleontologist ivan yefremov presented a view of a future interstellar communist civilization and is considered one of the most important soviet science fiction novels .
in 1959 robert a . heinlein 's " starship troopers " marked a departure from his earlier juvenile stories and novels .
it is one of the first examples of military science fiction .
the german space opera series perry rhodan , written by various authors , started in 1961 with an account of the first moon landing and has since expanded in space to multiple universes , and in time by billions of years .
it has become the most popular science fiction book series of all time .
in the 1960s and 1970s , new wave science fiction was known for its use of experimentation .
in 1961 , he published his first book , " solaris " .
the novel was about the theme of human limitations as its characters attempted to study a seemingly intelligent ocean on a newly discovered planet .
1965 's dune , which was a much more complex and detailed imagined future society than had previous science fiction .
in 1968 , philip k . dick 's " do androids dream of electric sheep ? "
it is the literary source of the " blade runner " movie franchise .
ursula k . le guin was set in 1969 .
it is one of the most influential examples of science fiction , feminist science fiction , and anthropological science fiction .
in 1976 , c . j . cherryh published " gate of ivrel " and " brothers of earth " , which began her alliance-union universe future history series .
in 1979 , " science fiction world " began publication in the people 's republic of china .
it is the most popular science fiction magazine in china .
in 1984 , william gibson 's first novel " neuromancer " helped make cyberpunk and the word " cyberspace " .
in 1986 , " shards of honor " by lois mcmaster bujold began her vorkosigan saga .
in 1992 , neal stephenson , a famous writer in the book " snow crash " , published in the united states .
in 2007 , liu cixin 's novel " the three-body problem " was published in china .
it won the 2015 hugo award for best novel .
the emerging themes of science fiction include environmental issues , the implications of the internet and the expanding information universe , questions about biotechnology , nanotechnology , and post-scarcity societies .
recent trends and subgenres include steampunk , biopunk , and mundane science fiction .
the first , or at least one of the first , recorded science fiction movie is 1902 's " a trip to the moon " , directed by georges melies .
it was profoundly influential on later filmmakers , bringing a different kind of creativity and fantasy to the cinematic medium .
melies 's innovative editing and special effects were widely copied and became important parts of the medium .
1927 's " metropolis " , directed by fritz lang , is the first science fiction movie .
though not well received in its time , it is now considered a great and influential movie .
in 1954 , " godzilla " , directed by ishiro honda , began the kaiju subgenre of science fiction movie .
1968 's " " , directed by stanley kubrick , was based on the work of arthur c . clarke .
the 1963 novel " la planete des singes " by pierre boulle was released to popular and critical acclaim due to its vivid depiction of a post-apocalyptic world in which intelligent humans dominate humans .
george lucas began the " star wars " movie series in 1977 .
the series is often called a space opera .
since the 1980s , science fiction movies , fantasy , horror and superhero movies have dominated hollywood 's big-budget productions .
science fiction movies often " cross-over " with other genres , including animation " big hero 6 "-e "-2008 , " big hero 6 " -lrb- 2008 -rrb- , " big hero 6 " -lrb- 2014 -rrb- , gangsterised in the western part of the city , westernised in the united kingdom , ireland , ireland , and western countries , and western countries .
science fiction and television have always been close .
television or television-like technologies frequently appeared in science fiction long before television became widely available in the late 1940s and early 1950s .
the first science fiction television program was a thirty-five-minute based play by karel capek .
the first popular science fiction program on american television was captain video and his video rangers .
the twilight zone was the first episode to be shown on television was shown on television from 1959 to 1964 .
it had fantasy , suspense , and horror as well as science fiction .
critics have said it was one of the best tv programs of any genre .
the animated series " the jetsons " , while intended as comedy and only running for one season opener 1962 – 1963 忠 predicted many inventions now in common use : flat-screen televisions , newspapers on a computer-like screen , computer viruses , video chat , video chat , tanning beds , home treadmills , and more .
in 1963 , the time travel-themed " doctor who " was shown on bbc television .
the series ran until 1989 and was revived in 2005 .
it has been very popular around the world .
other programs in the 1960s included " the outer limits " ; 1965-1968 ; and " lost in space " ; and " the prisoner " — 1967 .
" legally the original series jenks " was created by gene roddenberry .
it combines elements of space opera and space western .
only mildly successful at first , the series gained popularity through syndication and extraordinary fan interest .
it became a very popular franchise with many movies and television shows , novels , and other works and products .
this led to four additional " star trek " shows displaying " " : " during the year 1993-1999 ; " ; " ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ;
it was first shown in 1983 .
it was about an attempted takeover of earth by reptilian aliens .
red dwarf is a science fiction series .
the show was created by chris carter .
" stargate " was released in 1994 .
" stargate sg-1 " was first shown in 1997 and ran for 10 seasonsference 1997-2007 rq .
spin-off series include stargate infinity , stargate atlantis , and stargate universe .
other 1990s series included " quantum leap " egyptology , " babylon 5 " armour " , and " babylon 5 " .
syfy , launched in 1992 as the sci-fi channel , specializes in science fiction , supernatural horror , and fantasy .
science fiction 's popularity was very popular in the first half of the 20th century .
science fiction has often predicted scientific and technological progress .
some works predict that new inventions and progress will improve life and society , for instance the stories of arthur c . clarke and " star trek " .
others , such as h . g . wells ' " the time machine " and aldous huxley 's " brave new world " , warn about possible negative consequences .
in 2001 , the national science foundation conducted a survey on public attitudes and public understanding : science fiction and pseudoscience .
people who read or prefer science fiction may think about or relate to science differently than other people .
they also support the idea of contacting extraterrestrial civilizations .
carl sagan wrote : " many scientists deeply involved in the exploration of the solar system quiver myself among them abstracts were first turned in that direction by science fiction . "
brian aldiss , who wrote science fiction , said that science fiction was " cultural wallpaper . "
evidence for this widespread influence can be found in trends for writers to employ science fiction as a tool for advocacy and generating cultural insights , as well as for educators when teaching across a range of academic disciplines not limited to the natural sciences .
scholar and science fiction critic george edgar slusser said that science fiction is the one real international literary form we have today .
crossovers between the sciences and the humanities are important for the century to come .
some people say that science fiction is a means of protest .
james cameron 's 2009 movie " avatar " was about the european colonization of the americas .
its images were used by , among others , in their protest against israel .
george orwell 's " nineteen eighty-four " is often used in protests against governments and leaders who are seen as totalitarian .
robots , artificial humans , human clones , and their possible conflicts with human society have all been major themes of science fiction since , at least the publication of shelly 's " frankenstein " .
some critics have seen this as reflecting authors ’ concerns over the social alienation seen in modern society .
the role reproduction plays in defining gender .
some works have illustrated these themes using utopias to explore a society in which gender differences or gender power imbalances do not exist .
libertarian science fiction is about the politics and social order implied by right libertarian philosophies with an emphasis on individualism and private property , and in some cases anti-statism .
climate fiction is a book about climate change and global warming .
university courses on literature and environmental issues may include climate change fiction in their syllabi , and it is often discussed by other media outside of science fiction fandom .
comic science fiction criticizes present-day society , and sometimes makes fun of the conventions and cliches of more serious science fiction .
science fiction is often said to generate a " sense of wonder . "
science fiction editor and critic david hartwell wrote : " science fiction ’ s appeal lies in combination of the rational , the believable , with the miraculous .
it is an appeal to the sense of wonder . "
carl sagan said : “ one of the great benefits of science fiction is that it can convey bits and pieces , hints and phrases , of knowledge unknown or inaccessible to the reader . . . works you ponder over as the water is running out of the bathtub or as you walk through the woods in an early winter snowfall . "
isaac asimov said in 1967 that there were changes that happened in the science fiction community : " and because today ’ s real life so resembles day-before-yesterday ’ s fantasy , the old-time fans are restless .
if they admit it or not , is a feeling of disappointment and even outrage that the outer world has invaded their private domain .
they feel the loss of a ' sense of wonder ' because it was once truly confined to ' wonder ' has now become prosaic and mundane .
the study of science fiction , or science fiction studies , is the critical assessment , interpretation , and discussion of science fiction literature , movie , tv shows , new media , fandom , and fan fiction .
science fiction scholars study science fiction to better understand it .
science fiction studies began around the turn of the 20th century , but it was not until later that science fiction studies solidified as a discipline with the publication of the academic journals " extrapolation " — " extrapolation " — 1972 foley , and " science fiction studies " at the 1973 nationalsothe , and the establishment of the science fiction foundation .
the field has grown since the 1970s with the establishment of more journals , organizations , and conferences .
science fiction has historically been sub-divided between hard science fiction and soft science fiction .
however , this difference has come under increasing scrutiny in the 21st century .
some authors , such as tade thompson and jeff vandermeer , have pointed out that stories that focus explicitly on physics , astronomy , mathematics , and engineering tend to be considered " hard " science fiction .
max gladstone defined " hard " science fiction as stories " where the math works , " but pointed out that this ends up with stories that often seem " weirdly dated , " as scientific paradigms shift over time .
michael swanwick dismissed the traditional definition of " hard " sf altogether , instead saying that it was defined by characters striving to solve problems " in the right way – with determination , a touch of stoicism , and the consciousness that the universe is not on his or her side . "
ursula k . leguin also said that the science fiction writers dismiss everything except , well , physics , astronomy and chemistry .
sociology , anthropology , and sociology , are different from other things .
they ’ re not that interested in what human beings do , really .
i draw on the social sciences a great deal . "
respected authors of main-stream literature have written science fiction .
mary shelley wrote several science fiction novels including " frankenstein ; or , the modern prometheus "oteric 1818 c10 " .
aldous huxley 's " brave new world " ɔ 1932
kurt vonnegut was a highly respected american author .
other science fiction authors whose works are considered to be " serious " literature include ray bradbury blush .
ursula k . le guin first asked her book " can a science fiction writer write a novel ? "
" i believe that all novels , . . deal with character , and that it is to show character – not to preach doctrines , sing songs , or celebrate the glories of the british empire , that the form of the novel , so clumsy , verbose , and undramatic , so rich , elastic , and alive , has evolved .
the great novelists have brought us to see whatever they wish us to see through some character .
otherwise they would not be novelists , but poets , historians , or pamphleteers .
orson scott card , best known for his 1985 science fiction novel " ender 's game " , has said that in science fiction the message and intellectual significance of the work is contained within the story itself .
science fiction author gregory benford has said : " sf is perhaps the defining genre of the twentieth century , although its conquering armies are still camped outside the rome of the literary citadels . "
jonathan lethem , in an essay published in the " village voice " entitled " close encounters : the squandered promise of science fiction , " suggested that the point in 1973 when thomas pynchon 's " gravity 's rainbow " was nominated for the nebula award and was passed over in favor of arthur c . clarke 's " rendezvous " .
david barnett has pointed out that there are books such as " the road "riety 2006 egypt by cormac mccarthy , " cloud atlas " egypt , and the gone-away world " egypt .
doris lessing , who was later awarded the nobel prize in literature , wrote a series of five sf novels , " canopus in argos : archives " — 1979 – 1983 .
science fiction is being written , and has been written by diverse authors from around the world .
according to the science fiction publisher tor books , men outnumber women by 78 % to 22 % among submissions to the publisher .
a controversy about voting slates in the 2015 hugo awards showed tensions in the science fiction community .
the world science fiction society at worldcon voted on by fans ; the nebula award for literature , presented by the science fiction and fantasy writers of america , and voted on by the science fiction and fantasy writers of america , and voted on by the community of authors .
one notable award for science fiction movies and tv programs is the saturn award .
there are other national awards , like canada 's prix aurora awards , regional awards , like the endeavour award presented at orycon for works from the u . s . pacific northwest , and special interest or subgenre awards such as the chesley award for art , presented by the association of science fiction and fantasy artists , or the world fantasy award for fantasy .
magazines may organize reader polls , notably the locus award .
conventions conventions conventions are held in fandom , often in cities around the world , catering to a local , regional , national , or international membership .
general-interest conventions cover all aspects of science fiction .
most science fiction conventions are organized by volunteers in non-profit groups .
the convention 's activities are called " the program " .
additional activities occur throughout the convention that are not part of the program .
these are usually a dealer 's room , art show , and hospitality loungeliness or " con suites " .
conventions may host awards ceremonies .
worldcons presents the hugo awards each year .
sf societies , referred to as " clubs " except in formal contexts , form a year-round base of activities for science fiction fans .
they may be associated with an ongoing science fiction convention , or have regular club meetings , or both .
long-established groups like the new england science fiction association and the los angeles science fantasy society have clubhouses for meetings and storage of convention supplies and research materials .
the science fiction and fantasy writers of america temeraire sfwa tortricidae was founded by damon knight in 1965 as a non-profit organization to serve the community of professional science fiction authors .
science fiction fandom is the " community of the literature of ideas , . . the culture in which new ideas emerge and grow before being released into society at large " .
members of this community linux linux , as discussed above , are often in contact with each other at conventions or clubs , through print or online fanzines , or on the internet using websites , mailing lists , and other resources .
sf fandom emerged from the letters column in " amazing stories " magazine .
once they were in regular contact , fans wanted to meet each other , and they organized local clubs .
in the 1930s , the first science fiction conventions gathered fans from a wider area .
the earliest online fandom was the sf lovers community , originally a mailing list in the late 1970s with a text archive file that was updated regularly .
in the 1980s , usenet groups greatly expanded the circle of fans online .
in the 1990s , the development of the world-wide web made the online community much bigger .
most of these websites are small , ephemeral , and / or about topics like sf site and science fictioncore .
the first science fiction fanzine , " the comet " , was published in 1930 .
fanzine printing methods have changed over the decades , from the mimeograph , and the ditto machine , to modern photocopying .
distribution volumes rarely justify the cost of commercial printing .
contemporary fanzines are printed on computer printers or at local copy shops .
david langford , editor of the " ansible " magazine , won numerous hugo awards .
other notable fanzines to win one or more hugo awards include file 770 , mimosa , and plokta .
artists working for fanzines have frequently become famous in the field , including brad w . foster , teddy harvia , and joe mayhew .
forrest j ackerman is credited with first using the term " sci-fi " rbis analogous to the then-trendy " hi-fi "artharthe in 1954 .
as science fiction entered popular culture , writers and fans active in the field came to associate the term with low-budget , low-tech " b-movies , " and with low quality pulp fiction .
by the 1970s , some critics within the field , such as damon knight and terry carr , were using " sci fi " to distinguish hack-work from serious science fiction .
peter nicholls writes that sf is " the preferred abbreviation within the community of sf writers and readers . "
he suggested the term speculative fiction to be used instead for those that are more serious or thoughtful .
