survivor : africa was the third season of the american reality show " survivor " .
it was filmed in 2001 and was shown on tv from october 11,2001 until january 10,2002 .
hosted by jeff probst , it was the usual 39 days of gameplay with 16 competitors .
the two starting tribes were boran and samburu , named after the real-life borana and samburu tribes .
after 12 days , three members of each team switched to the other team , in what became known as the first twist in survivor .
when ten players remained , the two tribes merged into the moto maji tribe hamas swahili for ' fire ' and ' water ' .
the full season was released on dvd on october 5,2010 .
the collection was released in a 9-disc package , but later republished condensed into 5 discs .
ethan zohn , lex van den berghe , and tom buchanan returned to compete again in " .
zohn also appeared on the amazing race 19 with girlfriend and fellow " alumna jenna morasca " .
in 2013 , van den berghe and buchanan were both involved in the making of the television series " family beef " .
in 2015 , teresa cooper was on the public poll to choose the cast of " " , but was not chosen to compete .
zohn will return again for " " .
the sixteen tribes were split into two tribes , samburu and boran , and were given camps that included pre-constructed fencing to protect them from wildlife .
samburu took an early lead , but the tribe internally was divided along age linesisches silas , kim p . , brandon and lindsey as one , and frank , teresa , carl and linda as the other .
at their first tribal council , the age blocs left a stalemate tie between carl and lindsey , and with no previous votes to count , a quiz was used , with lindsay winning and putting the younger members in control ; on the next visit to tribal council , linda was eliminated , and both tribes were even at six .
on day 13 , the tribes were given a vague clue about sending three members on quest , unaware this would be the first tribal swap for " survivor " .
silas picked along with the two remaining samburu , frank and teresa , while kelly , big tom and lex were picked for boran .
after informed of the tribal swap , these players joined their new tribe .
the tribes merged into moto maji with ten players remaining , six from the original boran and four from samburu .
the samburu members worked to create internal strife within the boran faction .
first , they convincing them to eliminate clarence as a physical challenge threat , and then by angering lex as to incorrectly accuse of kelly of attempting to vote him off .
kelly sided with the samburu members , but lex had also convinced brandon to vote with his alliance , leading to kelly 's elimination .
brandon 's disloyalty to samburu would lead to his elimination as well as the remaining samburu members .
the final four were ethan , lex , big tom , and kim j . kim won the last two immunity challenges ; tom was voted off due to previous schemes to past future schemes to vote against lex 's group .
then , lex was voted out by kim 's solitary vote , as she felt that she would not have a chance at the final tribal council against either lex or ethan , but felt closer to ethan .
at the final tribal council , kim j . was praised for surviving the game for her age , but accused of riding the coattails of lex , ethan and big tom .
ethan was voted the sole survivor on a 5-2 .
unlike the previous two seasons , " survivor : africa " received much more criticism .
dalton ross of " entertainment weekly " said it was the eighth-worst season of the series .
tom santilli of examiner . com ranked it # 26 , saying that following " borneo " and " australian outback " , " it was a complete dud at the time , " while also noting that interesting , " and that the cast 's " lethargy showed on screen " showed the place because of the poor conditions in the filming .
it was also ranked 24th by fan site " the purple rock podcast , " which said that " this season suffers because of its location , " and that " the cast on this season is generally pretty decent , and probably would have been much better if they crotched of energy by lack of food and water " .
rob cesternino ranked the season 26th out of the first 30 .
the season was ranked as the fifth worst by andrea deiher of zap2it in 2013 , before it was replaced by " in 2015 .
there was some controversy about an immunity challenge in the last episode .
in a " fallen comrades " challenge , in which the players were quizzed on questions about players in the game who had been voted out , the final question was " which female contestant has no piercings ? "
the official answer was kelly .
lex lex later answered the question with lindsey 's name , who also had no piercings .
had lex been given credit for his correct answer , he and kim j . would have been tied in the challenge and would have faced tie-breaker questions .
after the producers had been told to the mistake , both third-place finisher lex and fourth-place finisher tom were awarded the $ 100,000 runner-up prize instead of the traditional third and fourth place earnings .
