The story of the eponymous character is taken from medieval German romance, notably the "Parzival" of Wolfram von Eschenbach and its sequel, "Lohengrin", written by a different author, itself inspired by the epic of "Garin le Loherain".
King Ludwig II of Bavaria named his fairy-tale castle Neuschwanstein Castle after the Swan Knight.
It was King Ludwig's patronage that later gave Wagner the means and opportunity to compose, build a theatre for, and stage his epic cycle "The Ring of the Nibelung".
The most popular and recognizable part of the opera is the Bridal Chorus, better known as "Here Comes the Bride", often played as a processional at weddings in the West.
The Grail Knight Lohengrin, son of the Grail King Parzival, is sent to the duchess of Brabant to defend her.
Wagner took up these characters and set the "forbidden question" theme at the core of a story which makes contrasts between the godly and the mundane, and between Early Middle Age Christendom and Germanic paganism.
The lover finds that she cannot recognize the god in this form, and demands that he should make the real sensual form of his being known.
Wagner made extensive use of leitmotives in his composition (for example, the Grail motif first revealed in the prelude, and the "question" motif first sung by Lohengrin to Elsa).
These motives allowed Wagner to precisely narrate the inner thoughts of the characters on stage, even without speech.
The first production of "Lohengrin" was in Weimar, Germany, on 28 August 1850 at the Staatskapelle Weimar under the direction of Franz Liszt, a close friend and early supporter of Wagner.
Wagner himself was unable to attend the first performance, having been exiled because of his part in the 1849 May Uprising in Dresden.
The Austrian premiere took place in Vienna at the Theater am Kärntnertor on 19 August 1858, with Róza Csillag as Ortrud.
The work was produced in Munich for the first time at the National Theatre on 16 June 1867, with Heinrich Vogl in the title role and Mathilde Mallinger as Elsa.
The Belgian premiere of the opera was given at La Monnaie on 22 March 1870 with Étienne Troy as Friedrich of Telramund and Feliciano Pons as Heinrich der Vogler.
The United States premiere of "Lohengrin" took place at the Stadt Theater at the Bowery in New York City on 3 April 1871.
Conducted by Adolf Neuendorff, the cast included Theodor Habelmann as Lohengrin, Luise Garay-Lichtmay as Elsa, Marie Frederici as Ortrud, Adolf Franosch as Heinrich and Edward Vierling as Telramund.
The first performance in Italy took place seven months later at the Teatro Comunale di Bologna on 1 November 1871 in an Italian translation by operatic baritone Salvatore Marchesi.
Angelo Mariani conducted the performance, which starred Italo Campanini as Lohengrin, Bianca Blume as Elsa, Maria Löwe Destin as Ortrud, Pietro Silenzi as Telramund, and Giuseppe Galvani as Heinrich der Vogler.
The performance on 9 November was attended by Giuseppe Verdi, who annotated a copy of the vocal score with his impressions and opinions of Wagner (this was almost certainly his first exposure to Wagner's music).
La Scala produced the opera for the first time on 30 March 1873, with Campanini as Lohengrin, Gabrielle Krauss as Elsa, Philippine von Edelsberg as Ortrud, Victor Maurel as Friedrich, and Gian Pietro Milesi as Heinrich.
The United Kingdom premiere of "Lohengrin" took place at the Royal Opera House, Covent Garden, on 8 May 1875 using the Italian translation by Marchesi.
Auguste Vianesi conducted the performance, which featured Ernesto Nicolini as Lohengrin, Emma Albani as Elsa, Anna D'Angeri as Ortruda, Maurel as Friedrich, and Wladyslaw Seideman as Heinrich.
The opera's first performance in Australia took place at the Prince of Wales Theatre in Melbourne on 18 August 1877.
The Metropolitan Opera mounted the opera for the first time on 7 November 1883, in Italian, during the company's inaugural season.
There was however an 1881 French performance given as a Benefit, in the Cercle de la Méditerranée Salon at Nice, organized by Sophie Cruvelli, in which she took the role of Elsa.
The Palais Garnier staged the work for the first time the following 16 September with van Dyck as Lohengrin, Rose Caron as Elsa, Caroline Fiérens-Peters as Ortrude, Maurice Renaud as Telramund, and Charles Douaillier as Heinrich.
The first Chicago performance of the opera took place at the Auditorium Building (now part of Roosevelt University) on 9 November 1891.
Lohengrin was first performed as part of the Bayreuth Festival in 1894, in a production directed by the composer's widow, Cosima Wagner and featured , Ernst van Dyck, alternating as Lohengrin, Lillian Nordica as Elsa, Marie Brema as Ortude, Demeter Popovic as Telramund and was conducted by Felix Mottl.
It received 6 performances in its first season in the opera house that Wagner built for the presentation of his works.
The people of the Duchy of Brabant are divided by quarrels and political infighting; also, a devious hostile power left over from the region's pagan past is seeking to subvert the prevailing monotheistic government and to return the Duchy to pagan rule.
A mysterious knight, sent by God and possessing superhuman charisma and fighting ability, arrives to unite and strengthen the people, and to defend the innocent noble woman Elsa from a false accusation of murder, but he imposes a condition: the people must follow him without knowing his identity.
Elsa in particular must never ask his name, or his heritage, or his origin.
The conspirators attempt to undermine her faith in her rescuer, to create doubt among the people, and to force him to leave.
King Henry the Fowler has arrived in Brabant, where he has assembled the German tribes in order to expel the marauding Hungarians from his dominions.
He also needs to settle a dispute involving the disappearance of the child-Duke Gottfried of Brabant.
The King declares that he cannot resolve the matter and will leave it to God's judgment through ordeal by combat.
When the King asks Elsa who shall be her champion, Elsa describes a knight she has beheld in her dreams (Narrative: "Alone in dark days").
Twice the Herald calls for a champion to step forward, but gets no response.
Elsa kneels and prays that God may send her champion to her.
He disembarks, dismisses the swan, respectfully greets the king, and asks Elsa if she will have him as her champion and marry him.
Elsa kneels in front of him and places her honour in his keeping.
He asks only one thing in return for his service: Elsa must never ask him his name or where he has come from.
Telramund's supporters advise him to withdraw because he cannot prevail against the Knight's powers, but he proudly refuses.
Ortrud reveals that she is a pagan witch (daughter of Radbod Duke of Frisia), and tries to revive Telramund's courage, assuring him that her people (and he) are destined to rule the kingdom again.
When Elsa appears on the balcony before dawn, she hears Ortrud lamenting and pities her.
As Elsa descends to open the castle door, Ortrud prays to her pagan gods, Wodan and Freia, for malice, guile, and cunning, in order to deceive Elsa and restore pagan rule to the region.
Ortrud warns Elsa that since she knows nothing about her rescuer, he could leave at any time as suddenly as he came, but Elsa is sure of the Knight's virtues.
In addition, he announces that the King has offered to make the unnamed knight the Duke of Brabant; however, the Knight has declined the title, and prefers to be known only as "Protector of Brabant".
The Herald further announces that the Knight will lead the people to glorious new conquests, and will celebrate the marriage of himself and Elsa.
In the back of the crowd, four noblemen quietly express misgivings to each other because the Knight has rescinded their privileges and is calling them to arms.
Telramund secretly draws the four noblemen aside and assures them that he will regain his position and stop the Knight, by accusing him of sorcery.
As Elsa and her attendants are about to enter the church, Ortrud rushes to the front of the procession and challenges Elsa to explain who the Knight is and why anyone should follow him.
Their conversation is interrupted by the entrance of the King with the Knight.
Elsa tells both of them that Ortrud was interrupting the ceremony.
The King tells Ortrud to step aside, then leads Elsa and the Knight toward the church.
He claims that his defeat in combat was invalid because the Knight did not give his name (trial by combat traditionally being open only to established citizens), then accuses the Knight of sorcery.
He demands that the Knight must reveal his name; otherwise the King should rule the trial by combat invalid.
The Knight refuses to reveal his identity and claims that only one person in the world has the right to make him do so: his beloved Elsa, and she has pledged not to exercise that right.
Elsa falls back into the crowd where Ortrud and Telramund try to intimidate her, but the Knight forces them both to leave the ceremony, and consoles Elsa.
Elsa takes one last look at the banished Ortrud, then enters the church with the wedding procession.
"Scene 1: The bridal chamber"
Elsa and her new husband are ushered in with the well-known bridal chorus, and they express their love for each other.
Ortrud's words, however, have made an impression on Elsa; she laments that her name sounds so sweet on her husband's lips but she cannot utter his name.
She asks him to tell her his name when no one else is around, but at all instances he refuses.
He tells the King that Elsa has broken her promise, and discloses his identity ("In fernem Land") by recounting the story of the Holy Grail and of Monsalvat.
He reveals himself as Lohengrin, Knight of the Grail and son of King Parsifal, sent to protect an unjustly accused woman.
Lohengrin tells Elsa that if she had kept her promise, she could have recovered her lost brother, and gives her his sword, horn and ring, for he is to become the future leader of Brabant.
A dove descends from heaven and, taking the place of the swan at the head of the boat, leads Lohengrin to the castle of the Holy Grail.
Elsa is stricken with grief and falls to the ground dead.
Liszt initially requested Wagner to carefully translate his essay on the opera from French into German, that he might be the principal and long-standing interpreter of the work – a work which, after performing, he regarded as "a sublime work from one end to the other".
In their article "Elsa's reason: on beliefs and motives in Wagner's "Lohengrin"", Ilias Chrissochoidis and Steffen Huck propose what they describe as "a complex and psychologically more compelling account of the opera.
This interpretation reveals Elsa as a rational individual, upgrades the dramatic significance of the act 1 combat scene, and, more broadly, signals a return to a hermeneutics of Wagnerian drama."