some paradoxes have proved errors in mathematical definitions assumed to be rigorous , and have caused axioms of mathematics and logic to be re-examined .
russell 's paradox is a paradox in which the russell 's paradox is used to determine the existence of a set of properties .
examples outside logic include the ship of theseus from philosophynington questioning whether a ship repaired over time by replacing each and all of its wooden parts , one at a time , would remain the same ship percival .
escher had a perspective-based paradox in many of his drawings , with walls that are seen as floors from other points of view , and staircases that appear to climb endlessly .
the word " paradox " often means ironic or unexpected .
other paradoxes include false statements telling " ' impossible ' is not a word in my vocabulary " , a simple paradoxometerometers or half-truths and the resulting biased assumptions .
the car crashes into a tree and the father is killed .
the paradox is caused by a hasty generalization , for if the surgeon is the boy 's father , the statement declares that it is true .
the paradox is resolved if the surgeon is a woman — the boy ’ s mother .
paradoxes which are not based on a hidden error generally occur at the fringes of context or language .
paradoxes that arise from apparently intelligible uses of language are often of interest to logicians and philosophers .
" this sentence is false " is an example of the well-known liar paradox : it is consistently interpreted as either true or false , because if it is known to be false , then it must be false , and if it is known to be true , then then it is known that it must be false .
russell 's paradox was a paradox in logic and set theory .
the paradox is a paradox that would arise if a time-traveler were to kill his grandfather before his mother or father had been conceived .
this is a specific example of the more general observation of the butterfly effect .
in the case of that apparent paradox of a time-traveler killing his own grandfather , it is the inconsistency of defining the past to which he returns as somehow different from the one which leads up to the future from which he begins his trip .
a fourth kind has sometimes been described since quine 's work .
the paradox is like the lover without passion .
some are common and are used regularly in medicine , such as the use of stimulants such as adderall and ritalin in the treatment of attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder disorder disorder .
