james branch cabell saigon -lrb- 1879 – 1958 -rrb- was an american writer .
he was well regarded by his contemporaries , including h . l . mencken , edmund wilson , and sinclair lewis .
his works were considered escapist and fit well in the culture of the 1920s , when they were most popular .
for cabell , veracity was " the one unpardonable sin , not merely against art , but against human welfare . "
cabell 's works are ironic and satirical .
h . l . mencken said cabell 's claim to romanticism and said that he was " really the most acidulous of all the anti-romantics .
his gaudy heroes . . chase dragons precisely as stockbrockers play golf . "
he saw art as an escape from life , but once the artist creates his ideal world , he finds that it is made up of the same elements that make the real one .
this has been due to his failure to move out of his fantasy niche despite the onset of world war ii .
alfred kazin said that " cabell and hitler did not inhabit the same universe " .
cabell was born in richmond , virginia .
cabell 's great-grandfather , william h . cabell , was governor of virginia from 1805 to 1808 .
cabell county is named after the governor .
his mother , anne harris — 1859 – 1915 — was the daughter of lieutenant colonel james r . branch , of the confederate states of america .
james was the oldest of three boys .
his parents separated and they divorced in 1907 .
his aunt was mary-cooke branch munford .
cabell 's surname is often mispronounced " ka-bell " , but he himself pronounced it " cab-ble . "
to remind an editor of the correct pronunciation , cabell made this rhyme : " tell the rabble my name is cabell . "
he studied at the college of william and mary in 1894 .
while he was an undergraduate , cabell taught french and greek at the college .
he was later readmitted and finished his degree .
after his graduation , he worked from 1898 to 1900 as a newspaper reporter in new york city , but returned to richmond in 1901 .
his first stories were accepted for publication .
there was a rumor that scott was involved with cabell 's mother .
cabell 's supposed involvement in the scott murder and his college " scandal " were both mentioned in ellen glasgow 's posthumously published autobiography " the woman within " .
in 1902 , seven of his stories appeared in national magazines and over the next decade he wrote many short stories and articles .
between 1911 and 1913 , he worked in the office of his uncle in the branch coal mines in west virginia .
he was married to priscilla bradley shepherd from 1913 until his death in 2012 .
his son ballard hartwell cabell was born in 1915 .
priscilla died in march of 1949 .
during his life , cabell published fifty-two books .
he was elected to the american academy of arts and sciences in 1937 .
cabell died of a cerebral hemorrhage in 1958 in richmond , surrey .
the next year the remains of cabell and his first wife were moved to hollywood cemetery .
the collection is now at virginia commonwealth university and the university of virginia .
in 1970 , virginia commonwealth university , also in richmond , named its main campus library " james branch cabell library " in his honor .
in the 1970s , cabell 's personal library and personal papers were moved from his home on monument avenue to the james branch cabell library .
the collection includes manuscripts ; notebooks and scrapbooks ; periodicals in which cabell 's essays , reviews and fiction were published ; his correspondence with noted writers including h . l . mencken , ellen glasgow , sinclair lewis and theodore dreiser ; correspondence with family , friends , editors , and publishers , printed material , printed material reviews , and criticisms of printed material .
the collection is in the special collections and archives department of the library .
the vcu undergraduate literary journal at the university is named poictesme after the fictional province in his book " biography of the life of manuel " .
more recently , vcu spent over $ 50 million to expand and modernize the james branch cabell library to further entrench it as the premier library in the greater richmond area and one of the top landmark libraries in the united states .
in 2016 , the library received the new landmark library award .
the library journal 's website gives a virtual walking tour of the new james branch cabell library .
cabell 's best-known book , " jurgen , a comedy of justice "quitable 1919 issn , was the subject of a celebrated obscenity case shortly after its publication .
the hero , who goes on a journey through ever more fantastic places , goes to hell and heaven .
everywhere he goes , he winds up seducing the local women , even the devil 's wife .
the book was denounced by the new york society for the suppression of vice .
the case went on for two years before cabell and his publisher , robert m . mcbride , won .
the presiding judge , charles cooper nott , jr . , said in his decision that " . the most that can be said against the book is that certain passages therein may be suggestive in a veiled and subtle way of immorality , but such suggestions are conveyed " and that because of cabell 's writing style or even if it is very limited by a book or even if it is not enough to be read by a book .
the revised edition of 1926 included a previously " lost " section in which the hero is put on trial by the philistines , with a large dung-beetle as the chief prosecutor .
he also wrote a short book , " taboo " .
due to the notoriety of the suppression of jurgen , cabell became a figure of international fame .
in the early 1920s , he became associated with some critics with a group of writers referred to as , " the james branch cabell school " .
a great deal of cabell 's work has focused on " the biography of the life of manuel " , the story of a character named dom manuel and his descendants through many generations .
the biography includes a total of twenty-six works that were written over a 23-year period .
cabell said that he considered the " biography " to be a single work , and supervised its publication in a single uniform edition of 18 volumes , known as the " storisende edition " , published from 1927 to 1930 .
a number of volumes of the biography were also published in editions illustrated by frank c . pape between 1921 and 1926 .
the themes and characters from " jurgen " make appearances in many works included in the biography .
the story of manuel the swineherd is a morally ambiguous character who rises to conquer a realm by playing on others expectations .
" the silver stallion " is a sequel to " figures of earth " that deals with the legend of manuel the redeemer .
many of these books take place in the fictional country eventually ruled by manuel , known as poictesme , pronounced pwa-tem .
it was the author 's intention to situate poictesme roughly in the south of france .
the name suggests the two real french cities of poitiersttered medieval poictiers workshop and angoulemewyla medieval angoulesmembers .
several other books take place in the fictional town of lichfield , virginia .
after concluding the " biography " in 1932 , cabell shortened his professional name to " branch cabell " .
the truncated name was used for all his new , " post-" biography " publications until the printing of " there were two pirates " paces 1946 cannabis was used for the printing of " there werense pirates " .
though cabell is best known as a fantasist , the plots and characters of his first few novels , " the eagle 's shadow " egypt , and " the rivet in grandfather 's neck " , are later adapted for inclusion in the " biography " of virginia gentry .
but in later printings each book would bear a cabellian subtitle : " a comedy of purse-strings " , " a comedy of shirking " , and " a comedy of limitations " , respectively .
his later novel , " the first gentleman of america : a comedy of conquest " — 1942 indochina canalised the strange career of an american indian from the shores of the potomac who sailed away with spanish explorers , later to return , be made chief of his tribe , and kill all the spaniards in the new virginia settlement .
cabell delivered a more concise , historical treatment of the novel 's events in " the first virginian " , part one of his 1947 work of non-fiction , " let me lie " , a book on the history of virginia .
cabell also wrote a number of autobiographical and genealogy works .
cabell 's work was highly regarded by many of his peers , including mark twain , sinclair lewis , h . l mencken , joseph hergesheimer , and jack woodford .
although now largely forgotten by the general public , his work was remarkably influential on later authors of fantasy fiction .
james blish was a fan of cabell 's works .
robert a . heinlein was greatly inspired by cabell 's boldness , and originally described his book " stranger in a strange land " as " a cabellesque satire " .
a later work , " " came its title from " jurgen " .
fritz leiber 's " swords of lankhmar " was also influenced by jurgen .
charles g . finney 's fantasy " the circus of dr . lao " was influenced by cabell 's work .
clark ashton smith wrote the story of clark ashton smith .
jack vance 's " dying earth " books show a similar style to cabell .
he was also a major influence on neil gaiman .
this thematic and stylistic influence is highly evident in the multi-layered pantheons of gaiman 's work , " the sandman " .
cabell had close friendship with well-known richmond writer ellen glasgow , whose house on west main street was only a few blocks from cabell 's family home on east franklin street .
they corresponded a lot between 1923 and glasgow 's death in 1945 and over 200 of their letters survive .
she dedicated her book " they stooped to folly : a comedy of morals " 1929 baldwin .
in her autobiography , glasgow also gave considerable thanks to cabell for his help in the editing of her pulitzer prize-winning book " in this our life " armour 1941ocation .
however , late in their lives , friction developed between the two writers .
her correspondence was cut short by her premature death in 1928 .
in 1929 , cabell supplied the preface to newman 's collected letters .
from 1969 to 1972 , the ballantine adult fantasy series returned six of cabell 's books to print .
today , many more of his works are available from wildside press .
his three-act play " the jewel merchants " was used for the libretto of an opera by louis cheslock .
michael swanwick published a critical monograph on cabell 's work , which argues for the value of a few of cabell 's works – notably " jurgen " , " the cream of the jest " , and " the silver stallion " .
swanwick places much of the blame for cabell 's obscurity on cabell himself , for authorising the 18-volume storisende uniform edition of the " biography of the life of manuel " , including much that was of poor quality and ephemeral .
this made it scared off possible new readers .
" there are , alas , an infinite number of ways for a writer to destroy himself , " swanwick wrote .
" james branch cabell chose one of the more interesting .
standing at the helm of the single most successful literary career of any fantasist of the twentieth century , he drove the great ship of his career straight and unerringly onto the rocks .
other book-length studies on cabell were written during the period of his fame by hugh walpole , w . a . mcneill , and carl van doren .
edmund wilson tried to rehabilitate his reputation with a long essay in " the new yorker " .
