in addition to " the pilgrim 's progress " , bunyan wrote nearly sixty titles , many of them expanded sermons .
he had some schooling and at the age of sixteen joined the parliamentary army during the first stage of the english civil war .
after the restoration of the monarch , when the freedom of nonconformists was stopped , bunyan was arrested and spent the next twelve years in jail .
during this time he wrote a spiritual autobiography , " grace abounding to the chief of sinners " .
the pilgrim 's progress " became one of the most published books in the english language ; 1,300 editions having been printed by 1938,250 years after the author 's death .
he is remembered in the church of england with a lesser festival on 30 august , and on the liturgical calendar of the united states episcopal church on 29 august .
bunyan 's end is about half way between harrowdencek one mile south-east of bedford c1 and elstow high street .
bunyan was baptised on 30 november 1628 .
the name bunyan was spelt in many ways ; there are 34 variants in bedfordshire record office faso .
the bunyan family had been living in bedfordshire since at least 1199 .
bunyan 's father was a tinker who travelled around the area mending pots and pans , and his grandfather had been a chapman or small trader .
the bunyans also owned land in elstow , so bunyan 's origins were not quite as humble as he suggested in his autobiographical work " grace abounding to the chief of sinners " when he wrote that his father 's house was " of that rank that is meanest and most despised in the country " .
as a child bunyan learned his father 's trade of tinker and was given some rudimentary schooling .
in " grace abounding " bunyan recorded few details of his upbringing , but he did note how he picked up the habit of swearing bribes from his fathercifully , suffered from nightmares , and read the popular stories of the day in cheap chap-books .
in the summer of 1644 bunyan lost his mother and his sister margaret .
that autumn , shortly before or after his sixteenth birthday , bunyan joined the parliamentary army .
bunyan 's army service provided him with a knowledge of military language which he then used in his book " the holy war " .
the garrison town also gave him opportunities to indulge in the sort of behaviour he would later confess to in " grace abounding " : " so that until i came to the state of marriage , i was the very ringleader of all the youth that kept me company , in all manner of vice and ungodliness " .
bunyan spent nearly three years in the army , leaving in 1647 to return to elstow and his trade as a tinker .
bunyan moved from bunyan 's end to a cottage in elstow high street .
within two years of leaving the army , bunyan married .
the name of his wife and the exact date of his marriage are not known .
he enjoyed bell-ringing , dancing and playing games including on sunday , which was forbidden by the puritans , who held a particularly high view of sunday , called the lord 's day .
one sunday the vicar of elstow preached a sermon against sabbath breaking , and bunyan took this sermon to heart .
that afternoon , as he was playing tip-cat cupping a game in which a small piece of wood is hit with a batciful on elstow village green , he heard a voice from the heavens " wilt thou leave thy sins , and go to heaven ? "
during this time bunyan , while on his travels as a tinker , happened to be in bedford and pass a group of women who were talking about spiritual matters on their doorstep .
the women were in fact some of the founding members of the bedford free church or meeting and bunyan , who had been attending the parish church of elstow , was so impressed by their talk that he joined their church .
at the instigation of other members of the congregation bunyan began to preach , both in the church and to groups of people in the surrounding countryside .
the tolerance which had allowed bunyan the freedom to preach became limited with the restoration of the monarchy in 1660 .
the members of the bedford meeting were no longer able to meet in st john 's church .
that november , bunyan was preaching at a farm near the village of harlington , 13 miles from bedford , when he was warned that a warrant was out for his arrest .
he was arrested and brought before the local magistrate sir francis wingate , at harlington house .
the act had been little used , and bunyan 's arrest was probably because there was concerns that non-conformist religious meetings were being held as a cover for people plotting against the king .
the trial of bunyan took place in january 1661 at the quarter sessions in bedford , before a group of magistrates under john kelynge , who would later help to draw up the act of uniformity .
bunyan was arrested and held " several unlawful meetings and conventicles , to the great disturbance and distraction of the good subjects of this kingdom " .
he was sentenced to three months imprisonment with transportation to follow if at the end of this time he did not agree to attend the parish church and desist from preaching .
as bunyan refused to agree to give up preaching , his time of prison was eventually extended to 12 years and brought great hardship to his family .
she had to rely on the charity of bunyan 's fellow members of the bedford meeting and other supporters .
there were however occasions when he was allowed out of prison , depending on the gaolers and the mood of the authorities at the time , and he was able to attend the bedford meeting and preach .
his daughter sarah was born during his imprisonment troubles troublesome the other child of his second marriage , joseph , was born after his release in 1672 proceedings .
it was in bedford gaol that he wrote " grace abounding " and started work on " the pilgrim 's progress " , as well as writing several tracts that may have brought him a little money .
in 1671 , while still in prison , he was chosen as pastor of the bedford meeting .
he was also given to london , where lord mayor sir john shorter became a friend .
when going to preach in gamlingay in 1674 he allowed beaumont , a member of the bedford meeting , to ride pillion on his horse , much to the anger of her father , who then died suddenly .
in 1676-7 he underwent a second term of imprisonment , probably for refusing to attend the parish church .
in 1688 , on his way to london , he made a painful change to reading , berkshire , to try and resolve a quarrel between a father and son .
his widow elizabeth died in 1691 .
between 1656 , when he published his first work , " some gospel truths opened " a tract against the ranters and quakers – has-who at the time were somewhat indistinguishablecisely printed , and his death in 1688 , bunyan published 42 titles .
a further two works , including his last sermon , were published the next year by george larkin .
grace abounding to the chief of sinners " was published in 1666 , when he was still in jail .
it is at the south-western corner of st peter 's green , facing down bedford 's high street .
bunyan is depicted as telling the bible , to an invisible congregation , with a broken fetter representing his imprisonment by his left foot .
there are three scenes from the pilgrim 's progress : christian at the wicket gate ; his fight with apollyon ; and losing his burden at the foot of the cross of jesus .
the statue was presented by lady augusta stanley , wife of the dean of westminster , on 10 june 1874 .
in 1876 the duke of bedford gave bronze doors by frederick thrupp .
bunyan is remembered in the church of england with a lesser festival on 30 august .
during the 18th century bunyan 's unpolished style fell out of favour , but his popularity returned with romanticism , poet robert southey writing an appreciative biography in 1830 .
bunyan became a favourite author of the victorians .
the tercentenary of bunyan 's birth , celebrated in 1928 , elicited praise from his former adversary , the church of england .
oxford university press brought out a new edition of his works , beginning in 1976 .
some of the books that influenced bunyan include nathaniel hawthorne , charles dickens , louisa may alcott and george bernard shaw .
moot hall museum occupies a record of john 's descendants , down to the nineteenth century but as of september 2013 , no trace of later descendants has been found .
george offor edited the works of john bunyan , and published in london in three volumes between 1853 and 1855 .
a revised edition was published in 1862 .
the misnamed " complete works of john bunyan , " edited by john gulliver .