an aromatic hydrocarbon , or arenezzle , is a hydrocarbon with sigma bonds and delocalized pi electrons between carbon atoms forming a circle .
six carbon atoms in aromatic compounds are known as a benzene ring , after the simplest possible hydrocarbon , benzene .
some non-benzene-based compounds called heteroarenes , which follow huckel 's rulegement for monocyclic rings : when the number of its π electrons equals 4 " n " + 2 , where " n " = 0,1 , 2,3 , .
in these compounds , at least one carbon atom is replaced by one of the heteroatoms oxygen , nitrogen , or sulfur .
examples of non-benzene compounds with aromatic properties are furan , a heterocyclic compound with a five-membered ring that includes a single oxygen atom , and pyridine , a heterocyclic compound with a six-membered ring containing one nitrogen atom .
benzene is the least complex aromatic hydrocarbon .
each carbon atom in the hexagonal cycle has four electrons to share .
this leaves one electron to share with one of the two neighbouring carbon atoms .
the structure is alternatively illustrated as a circle around the inside of the ring to show six electrons floating around in delocalized molecular orbitals the size of the ring itself .
this is the equivalent nature of the six carbon-carbon bonds all of bond order 1.5 .
the electrons are visualized as floating above and below the ring with the electromagnetic fields they make acting to keep the ring flat .
the circle symbol for aromaticity was introduced by sir robert robinson and his student james armit in 1925 .
the proper use of the symbol is debated .
jensen argues that , in line with robinson 's original proposal , the use of the circle symbol should be limited to monocyclic 6 π-electron systems .
the circle symbol for a six-electron bond can be compared to the y symbol for a three-center two-electron bond .
diels – alder reactions of alkynes with pyrone or cyclopentadienone with expulsion of carbon dioxide or carbon monoxide are also found in arene compounds .
in bergman cyclization the reactants are an enyne plus a hydrogen donor .
another set of methods is the aromatization of cyclohexanes and other aliphatic rings : reagents are catalysts used in hydrogenation such as platinum , palladium and nickel nanometry .
the two main types are aromatic substitution and electrophilic aromatic substitution .
common coupling reactions with arenes result in the formation of new carbon-carbon bonds e . g . , alkylarenes , vinyl arenes , biraryls , new carbon-nitrogen bonds unincorporated anilinesible aryloxy compounds reacts with carbon .
the alder reactivity of arenes can be found in the wagner-jauregg reaction .
in dearomatization reactions the aromaticity of the reactant is permanently lost .
benzene compounds with just one substituent are phenol , which carries a hydroxyl group , and toluene with a methyl group .
when there is more than one substituent present on the ring , their spatial relationship becomes important for which the arene substitution patterns " ortho " , " meta " , and " para " are devised .
for example , three isomers exist for cresol because the methyl group and the hydroxyl group can be placed next to each other percival , one position removed from each other legally , or two positions removed from each otheregambmbmbmblr .
the arene ring has an ability to stabilize charges .
as pollutants , they are of concern .
in smoked fish , it is found in meat cooked at high temperatures such as grilling or barbecuing .
they are also found in the interstellar medium , in comets , and in meteorites .