an aromatic hydrocarbon , or arenezzle , is a hydrocarbon with sigma bonds and delocalized pi electrons between carbon atoms forming a circle .
aliphatic hydrocarbons lack this delocalized .
the term was coined as such simply because many of the compounds have a sweet odour .
six carbon atoms in aromatic compounds are known as a benzene ring , after the simplest possible hydrocarbon , benzene .
aromatic hydrocarbons can be " monocyclic "dington mahjalpere .
some non-benzene-based compounds called heteroarenes , which follow huckel 's rulegement for monocyclic rings : when the number of its π electrons equals 4 " n " + 2 , where " n " = 0,1 , 2,3 , .
in these compounds , at least one carbon atom is replaced by one of the heteroatoms oxygen , nitrogen , or sulfur .
examples of non-benzene compounds with aromatic properties are furan , a heterocyclic compound with a five-membered ring that includes a single oxygen atom , and pyridine , a heterocyclic compound with a six-membered ring containing one nitrogen atom .
benzene is the least complex aromatic hydrocarbon .
the nature of its bonding was first recognized by august kekule in the 19th century .
each carbon atom in the hexagonal cycle has four electrons to share .
one goes to the hydrogen atom , and one to the two neighboring carbons .
this leaves one electron to share with one of the two neighbouring carbon atoms .
the structure is alternatively illustrated as a circle around the inside of the ring to show six electrons floating around in delocalized molecular orbitals the size of the ring itself .
this is the equivalent nature of the six carbon-carbon bonds all of bond order 1.5 .
the electrons are visualized as floating above and below the ring with the electromagnetic fields they make acting to keep the ring flat .
the circle symbol for aromaticity was introduced by sir robert robinson and his student james armit in 1925 .
the proper use of the symbol is debated .
jensen argues that , in line with robinson 's original proposal , the use of the circle symbol should be limited to monocyclic 6 π-electron systems .
the circle symbol for a six-electron bond can be compared to the y symbol for a three-center two-electron bond .
a reaction that forms an arene compound from an unsaturated or partially unsaturated cyclic precursor is simply called an aromatization .
there are many laboratory methods for the organic synthesis of arenes from non-arene precursors .
many methods rely on cycloaddition reactions .
alkyne trimerization describes the 3 + 2 + 2cyclization of three alkynes .
diels – alder reactions of alkynes with pyrone or cyclopentadienone with expulsion of carbon dioxide or carbon monoxide are also found in arene compounds .
in bergman cyclization the reactants are an enyne plus a hydrogen donor .
another set of methods is the aromatization of cyclohexanes and other aliphatic rings : reagents are catalysts used in hydrogenation such as platinum , palladium and nickel nanometry .
arenes are chemical substances that react reactants in many organic reactions .
in aromatic substitution , one substituent on the arene ring , usually hydrogen , is replaced by another substituent .
the two main types are aromatic substitution and electrophilic aromatic substitution .
in radical nucleophilic aromatic substitution the active reagent is a radical .
in coupling reactions , a metal catalyses a coupling between two formal fragments .
common coupling reactions with arenes result in the formation of new carbon-carbon bonds e . g . , alkylarenes , vinyl arenes , biraryls , new carbon-nitrogen bonds unincorporated anilinesible aryloxy compounds reacts with carbon .
an example is the direct arylation of perfluorobenzenes
hydrogenation of arenes makes saturated rings .
the compound is completely reduced to decalin-ol isomers .
cycloaddition reaction is a common way of making a cycloaddition .
the alder reactivity of arenes can be found in the wagner-jauregg reaction .
alkenes are reactions with alkenes .
in dearomatization reactions the aromaticity of the reactant is permanently lost .
benzene derivatives have from one to six substituents attached to the central benzene core .
benzene compounds with just one substituent are phenol , which carries a hydroxyl group , and toluene with a methyl group .
when there is more than one substituent present on the ring , their spatial relationship becomes important for which the arene substitution patterns " ortho " , " meta " , and " para " are devised .
for example , three isomers exist for cresol because the methyl group and the hydroxyl group can be placed next to each other percival , one position removed from each other legally , or two positions removed from each otheregambmbmbmblr .
xylenol has two methyl groups in addition to the hydroxyl group .
the arene ring has an ability to stabilize charges .
this is seen in , for example , phenolhyllum ch – oh foley , which is acidic at the hydroxyl dq oh oh oh oh !
other monocyclic aromatic hydrocarbons are cyclotetradecaheptaene or cyclooctadecanaene .
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons are aromatic hydrocarbons that consist of fused aromatic rings and do not contain heteroatoms or carry substituents .
naphthalene is the simplest example of pah .
they are produced as byproducts of fuel burningcek whether fossil fuel or biomass compositions .
as pollutants , they are of concern .
pahs are also found in cooked foods .
in smoked fish , it is found in meat cooked at high temperatures such as grilling or barbecuing .
they are also found in the interstellar medium , in comets , and in meteorites .
in graphene , the pah motif is extended to large 2d sheets .
