It is primarily concerned with the arrangement of electrons around the nucleus and the processes by which these arrangements change.
This comprises ions, neutral atoms and, unless otherwise stated, it can be assumed that the term "atom" includes ions.
Physicists distinguish between atomic physics—which deals with the atom as a system consisting of a nucleus and electrons—and nuclear physics, which studies nuclear reactions and special properties of atomic nuclei.
It is not concerned with the formation of molecules (although much of the physics is identical), nor does it examine atoms in a solid state as condensed matter.
While modelling atoms in isolation may not seem realistic, if one considers atoms in a gas or plasma then the time-scales for atom-atom interactions are huge in comparison to the atomic processes that are generally considered.
By this consideration atomic physics provides the underlying theory in plasma physics and atmospheric physics, even though both deal with very large numbers of atoms.
These are normally in a ground state but can be excited by the absorption of energy from light (photons), magnetic fields, or interaction with a colliding particle (typically ions or other electrons).
If the electron absorbs a quantity of energy less than the binding energy, it will be transferred to an excited state.
After a certain time, the electron in an excited state will "jump" (undergo a transition) to a lower state.
In a neutral atom, the system will emit a photon of the difference in energy, since energy is conserved.
In this case, a visible photon or a characteristic x-ray is emitted, or a phenomenon known as the Auger effect may take place, where the released energy is transferred to another bound electron, causing it to go into the continuum.
There are rather strict selection rules as to the electronic configurations that can be reached by excitation by light — however there are no such rules for excitation by collision processes.
This theory was later developed in the modern sense of the basic unit of a chemical element by the British chemist and physicist John Dalton in the 18th century.
At this stage, it wasn't clear what atoms were although they could be described and classified by their properties (in bulk).
The true beginning of atomic physics is marked by the discovery of spectral lines and attempts to describe the phenomenon, most notably by Joseph von Fraunhofer.
As far as atoms and their electron shells were concerned, not only did this yield a better overall description, i.e.
the atomic orbital model, but it also provided a new theoretical basis for chemistry (quantum chemistry) and spectroscopy.
Since the Second World War, both theoretical and experimental fields have advanced at a rapid pace.
This can be attributed to progress in computing technology, which has allowed larger and more sophisticated models of atomic structure and associated collision processes.