the title is a translation into german of the old norse phrase " " .
wagner 's account is very different from his old norse sources .
the three norns , daughters of erda , are spinning the rope of destiny .
they sing of the past and the present .
without warning , the rope breaks .
the norns disappear into the earth , and lamenting their loss of wisdom .
siegfried and brunnhilde come out of their cave .
brunnhilde sends siegfried off to new adventures .
siegfried gives her the ring of power that he took from fafner 's hoard .
siegfried rides away as an orchestral interlude for siegfried to go to the rhine endings .
act one begins in the hall of the gibichungs palace .
gunther , lord of the gibichung , sits enthroned .
hagen says that he should find a wife for himself and a husband for their sister gutrune .
he suggests that siegfried is the wife of gunther .
he tells gutrune that he has given her a potion that she can use to make siegfried forget brunnhilde and fall in love with gutrune .
gunther and gutrune agree with this plan .
siegfried appears at gibichung hall .
gunther offers him the love potion .
siegfried toasts brunnhilde and their love .
he falls in love with gutrune .
siegfried offers to win a wife for gunther .
they swear that blood-brotherhoodttered hagen holds the drinking horn in which they mix their blood , but he does not join in the oath oath .
hagen , left on guard duty , gloats that his so-called masters are unwittingly bringing the ring to himmler ’ s watch .
meanwhile , brunnhilde is visited by her valkyrie sister waltraute .
wotan is sad at losing his spear , as it has all the treaties and bargains he has made-everything that gives him power – carved into its shaft .
wotan ordered branches of the world tree , to be piled around valhalla ; sent his magic ravens to spy on the world and bring him news ; and waits in valhalla for the end .
the curse is now affecting their father , wotan .
brunnhilde refuses to give her the token of her marriage , and the prince rides away in despair .
siegfried arrives , disguised as gunther .
siegfried overpowers her , but takes the ring from her hand and puts it on his own .
hagen is waiting by the bank of the rhine .
when alberich tells him that he will kill siegfried and get the ring .
alberich exits as dawn breaks .
siegfried arrives by tarnhelm-magic , having resumed his natural form and left brunnhilde on the boat with gunther .
hagen summons the gibichung vassals to welcome gunther and his bride .
he does this by sounding the war-alarm .
the vassals learn that the occasion is not battle , but their master 's wedding and party .
gunther leads in a downcast brunnhilde , who is astonished to see siegfried .
she realizes that siegfried has been betrayed by gunther , the man who conquered her was not gunther , but siegfried in disguise .
she accuses siegfried of having seduced her .
siegfried , who does not have been brunhilde 's lover , swears on hagen 's spear that her accusations are false .
brunnhilde seizes the tip of the spear and swears that they are true .
hagen supervises silently as others take oaths to his advantage .
this time , since the oath is sworn on a weapon , the understanding is that if the oath is proven false , the weapon 's owner should avenge it by killing the weapon .
siegfried leads gutrune and the bystanders off to the wedding feast , leaving brunnhilde , hagen , and gunther alone .
gunther agrees to hagen 's suggestion that siegfried must be killed in order for gunther to regain his standing .
brunnhilde , seeking revenge for siegfried 's manifest treachery , joins the plot and tells hagen that siegfried would be vulnerable to a stab in the back .
hagen and gunther decide to kill siegfried .
hagen repeats his pledge to alberich : to acquire the ring and rule the world through its power .
the rhinemaidens mourn the lost rhine gold .
siegfried finds the hunting party .
the rhinemaidens urge him to return the ring and avoid its curse , but he says he prefers to die rather than bargain for his life .
they swim away , predicting that siegfried will die and that his heir , a lady , will treat them fairly .
siegfried rejoins the hunters , who include gunther and hagen .
while resting , he tells them about the adventures of his youth .
hagen gives him another drink which makes him remember what happened .
hagen stabs him in the back with his spear .
hagen explains in three words : " meineid racht ' ich ! "
- " i have avenged perjury ! "
siegfried admitted loving brunnhilde , the oath he swore on hagen 's spear was obviously false , so it was hagen 's duty to kill him with it .
hagen walks into the wood .
siegfried dies .
his body is carried away in a solemn funeral procession .
back in the gibichung hall , gutrune awaits siegfried 's return .
hagen arrives at the funeral party .
gutrune is devastated when siegfried 's corpse is brought in .
gunther blames siegfried 's death on hagen , who replies that siegfried had incurred the penalty of his false oath .
hagen appeals to the vassals to support his claim .
gunther attacks gunther , the king of sweden .
siegfried moves to take the ring .
hagen recoils in fear .
brunnhilde orders a funeral pyre to be assembled by the river endings .
she takes the ring and tells the rhinemaidens to claim it from her ashes .
lighting the pyre with a firebrand , she sends wotan 's home with " anxiously liszt-for tidings " , and to fly by the magic fire for loge to fulfill his task .
she rides her horse grane and rides into the flames .
a sequence of leitmotifs show the fire flaring up , and the hall of the gibichungs catching fire and collapsing .
the fire over the river is to protect the rhine , and the rhinemaidens swim in to claim the ring .
hagen tries to stop them but they drag him into the water and drown him .
as they celebrate the return of the ring and its gold to the river , a red glow is seen in the sky .
as the gibichungs watch , valhalla is finally seen , with gods and heroes seen as described by waltraute in act 1 .
flames are in the hall of the gods , hiding it and them from sight completely .
the gods are consumed in the flames .
" dawn and siegfried 's rhine journey " is a short piece of music from the prologue without the singers .
wagner approved some of these ideas .
these parts include specially composed endings so that the excerpt is better able to stand on its own as a complete composition .
the berlin philharmonic 's last performance before their evacuation from berlin was to the end of world war ii .
robert a . hall , jr . has studied the opera in terms of cultural symbolism .
hermann danuser has discussed the dramaturgy of the ending of " gotterdammerung " in the context of the entire " ring " cycle .
william kinderman said that the music was used in act iii of the opera .
warren j . darcy has suggested that wagner 's music was influenced by the " ring " cycle .
the historian john roberts suggested that the killing of siegfried by hagen with a stab in the back gave inspiration for the myth that the german army did not lose world war i , but was instead defeated by a treasonous " stab in the back " from civilians , in particular jews and socialists .
the great german bass kurt moll pointed out that the part of the main villain , hagen , is unique in the bass repertoire .
moll himself avoided the role .
